4. _The Music_

The music at the assemblies was of all kinds, both instrumental and vocal.
The English trials hardly mention music, possibly because the Sabbath had
fallen into a decadent condition; but the Scotch and French trials prove
that it was an integral part of the celebration. The Devil himself was the
usual performer, but other members of the society could also supply the
music, and occasionally one person held the position of piper to the Devil.
The music was always as an accompaniment of the dance; the instrument in
general use was a pipe, varied in England by a cittern, in Scotland by 'the
trump' or Jew's harp, also an instrument played with the mouth.

The Somerset witches said that 'the Man in black sometimes playes on a Pipe
or Cittern, and the company dance'.[523]

The North Berwick witches (1590), when at the special meeting called to
compass the death of the king, 'danced along the Kirk-yeard, Geilis Duncan
playing on a Trump.'[524] The instrument of the Aberdeen Devil (1597),
though not specified, was probably a pipe; it is usually called 'his forme
of instrument' in the dittays. Isobel Cockie of Aberdeen was accused of
being at a Sabbath on Allhallow Eve: 'Thou wast the ring-leader, next
Thomas Leyis; and because the Devil played not so melodiously and well as
thou crewit, thou took his instrument out of his mouth, then took him on
the chaps therewith, and played thyself thereon to the whole company.'[525]
At another meeting, Jonet Lucas was present: 'Thou and they was under the
conduct of thy master, the Devil, dancing in ane ring, and he playing
melodiously upon ane instrument, albeit invisibly to you.'[526] At Tranent
(1659) eight women and a man named John Douglas confessed to 'having merry
meetings with Satan, enlivened with music and dancing. Douglas was the
pyper, and the two favourite airs of his majesty were "Kilt thy coat,
Maggie, and come thy way with me", and "Hulie the bed will fa'."'[527]
Agnes Spark at Forfar (1661) 'did see about a dozen of people dancing, and
they had sweet music amongst them, and, as she thought, it was the music of
a pipe'.[528] Barton's wife was at a meeting in the Pentland Hills, where
the Devil 'went before us in the likeness of a rough tanny Dog, playing on
a pair of Pipes. The Spring he played (says she) was, The silly bit
Chiken, gar cast it a pickle and it will grow meikle.'[529] At Crook of
Devon (1662) the two old witches, Margaret Huggon and Janet Paton,
confessed to being at a meeting, and 'the foresaids hail women was there
likeways and did all dance and ane piper play'.[530]

In France the instruments were more varied. Marie d'Aspilcouette, aged
nineteen, 'voyoit dancer auec violons, trompettes, ou tabourins, qui
rendoyent vne tres grande harmonie'.[531] Isaac de Queyran, aged
twenty-five, said that a minor devil (_diabloton_) played on a tambourine,
while the witches danced.[532] But as usual de Lancre is at his best when
making a general summary:

     'Elles dancent au son du petit tabourin & de la fluste, & par fois
     auec ce long instrument qu'ils posent sur le col, puis s'allongeant
     iusqu'auprés de la ceinture; ils le battent auec vn petit baston: par
     fois auec vn violon. Mais ce ne sont les seuls instrumès du sabbat,
     car nous auõs apprins de plusieurs, qu'on y oyt toute sorte
     d'instrumens, auec vne telle harmonie, qu'il n'y a concert au monde
     qui le puisse esgaler.'[533]

Vocal music was also heard at the meetings, sometimes as an accompaniment
of the dance, sometimes as an entertainment in itself. When it was sung as
a part of the dance, the words were usually addressed to the Master, and
took the form of a hymn of praise. Such a hymn addressed to the god of
fertility would be full of allusions and words to shock the sensibilities
of the Christian priests and ministers who sat in judgement on the witches.
Danaeus gives a general account of these scenes: 'Then fal they to
dauncing, wherin he leadeth the daunce, or els they hoppe and daunce merely
about him, singing most filthy songes made in his prayse.'[534] Sinclair
had his account from a clergyman: 'a reverend Minister told me, that one
who was the Devils Piper, a wizzard confest to him, that at a Ball of
dancing, the Foul Spirit taught him a Baudy song to sing and play, as it
were this night, and ere two days past all the Lads and Lasses of the town
were lilting it throw the street. It were abomination to rehearse
it.'[535] At Forfar Helen Guthrie told the court that Andrew Watson 'made
great merriment by singing his old ballads, and Isobell Shirrie did sing
her song called Tinkletum Tankletum'.[536] Occasionally the Devil himself
was the performer, as at Innerkip, where according to Marie Lamont 'he sung
to us and we all dancit'.[537] Boguet notes that the music was sometimes
vocal and sometimes instrumental: 'Les haubois ne manquent pas à ces
esbats: car il y en a qui sont commis à faire le devoir de menestrier;
Satan y iouë mesme de la flutte le plus souuent; & à d'autrefois les
Sorciers se contentent de chanter à la voix, disant toutefois leurs
chansons pesle-mesle, & auec vne confusion telle, qu'ils ne s'entendent pas
les vns les autres.'[538] At Aix in 1610 'the Magicians and those that can
reade, sing certaine Psalmes as they doe in the Church, especially _Laudate
Dominum de Coelis: Confitemini domino quoniam bonus_, and the Canticle
_Benedicite_, transferring all to the praise of Lucifer and the Diuels: And
the Hagges and Sorcerers doe houle and vary their hellish cries high and
low counterfeiting a kinde of villanous musicke. They also daunce at the
sound of Viols and other instruments, which are brought thither by those
that were skild to play vpon them.'[539] At another French trial in 1652
the evidence showed that 'on dansait sans musique, aux chansons'.[540]