HYACINTHUS

                ... "The sad death
    Of Hyacinthus, when the cruel breath
    Of Zephyr slew him--Zephyr penitent
    Who now, ere Phoebus mounts the firmament,
    Fondles the flower amid the sobbing rain."

        Keats.


"Whom the gods love die young"--truly it would seem so, as we read the
old tales of men and of women beloved of the gods. To those men who
were deemed worthy of being companions of the gods, seemingly no good
fortune came. Yet, after all, if even in a brief span of life they had
tasted god-given happiness, was their fate one to be pitied? Rather
let us keep our tears for those who, in a colourless grey world, have
seen the dull days go past laden with trifling duties, unnecessary
cares and ever-narrowing ideals, and have reached old age and the
grave--no narrower than their lives--without ever having known a
fulness of happiness, such as the Olympians knew, or ever having dared
to reach upwards and to hold fellowship with the Immortals.

Hyacinthus was a Spartan youth, son of Clio, one of the Muses, and of
the mortal with whom she had mated, and from mother, or father, or
from the gods themselves, he had received the gift of beauty. It
chanced one day that as Apollo drove his chariot on its
all-conquering round, he saw the boy. Hyacinthus was as fair to look
upon as the fairest of women, yet he was not only full of grace, but
was muscular, and strong as a straight young pine on Mount Olympus
that fears not the blind rage of the North Wind nor the angry tempests
of the South.

When Apollo had spoken with him he found that the face of Hyacinthus
did not belie the heart within him, and gladly the god felt that at
last he had found the perfect companion, the ever courageous and
joyous young mate, whose mood was always ready to meet his own. Did
Apollo desire to hunt, with merry shout Hyacinthus called the hounds.
Did the great god deign to fish, Hyacinthus was ready to fetch the
nets and to throw himself, whole-souled, into the great affair of
chasing and of landing the silvery fishes. When Apollo wished to climb
the mountains, to heights so lonely that not even the moving of an
eagle's wing broke the everlasting stillness, Hyacinthus--his strong
limbs too perfect for the chisel of any sculptor worthily to
reproduce--was ready and eager for the climb. And when, on the
mountain top, Apollo gazed in silence over illimitable space, and
watched the silver car of his sister Diana rising slowly into the deep
blue of the sky, silvering land and water as she passed, it was never
Hyacinthus who was the first to speak--with words to break the spell
of Nature's perfect beauty, shared in perfect companionship. There
were times, too, when Apollo would play his lyre, and when naught but
the music of his own making could fulfil his longing. And when those
times came, Hyacinthus would lie at the feet of his friend--of the
friend who was a god--and would listen, with eyes of rapturous joy, to
the music that his master made. A very perfect friend was this friend
of the sun-god.

Nor was it Apollo alone who desired the friendship of Hyacinthus.
Zephyrus, god of the South Wind, had known him before Apollo crossed
his path and had eagerly desired him for a friend. But who could stand
against Apollo? Sulkily Zephyrus marked their ever-ripening
friendship, and in his heart jealousy grew into hatred, and hatred
whispered to him of revenge. Hyacinthus excelled at all sports, and
when he played quoits it was sheer joy for Apollo, who loved all
things beautiful, to watch him as he stood to throw the disc, his taut
muscles making him look like Hermes, ready to spurn the cumbering
earth from off his feet. Further even than the god, his friend, could
Hyacinthus throw, and always his merry laugh when he succeeded made
the god feel that nor man nor god could ever grow old. And so there
came that day, fore-ordained by the Fates, when Apollo and Hyacinthus
played a match together. Hyacinthus made a valiant throw, and Apollo
took his place, and cast the discus high and far. Hyacinthus ran
forward eager to measure the distance, shouting with excitement over a
throw that had indeed been worthy of a god. Thus did Zephyrus gain his
opportunity. Swiftly through the tree-tops ran the murmuring South
Wind, and smote the discus of Apollo with a cruel hand. Against the
forehead of Hyacinthus it dashed, smiting the locks that lay upon it,
crashing through skin and flesh and bone, felling him to the earth.
Apollo ran towards him and raised him in his arms. But the head of
Hyacinthus fell over on the god's shoulder, like the head of a lily
whose stem is broken. The red blood gushed to the ground, an
unquenchable stream, and darkness fell on the eyes of Hyacinthus, and,
with the flow of his life's blood, his gallant young soul passed away.

"Would that I could die for thee, Hyacinthus!" cried the god, his
god's heart near breaking. "I have robbed thee of thy youth. Thine is
the suffering, mine the crime. I shall sing thee ever--oh perfect
friend! And evermore shalt thou live as a flower that will speak to
the hearts of men of spring, of everlasting youth--of life that lives
forever."

As he spoke, there sprang from the blood-drops at his feet a cluster
of flowers, blue as the sky in spring, yet hanging their heads as if
in sorrow.[4]

[Illustration: DARKNESS FELL ON THE EYES OF HYACINTHUS]

And still, when winter is ended, and the song of birds tell us of the
promise of spring, if we go to the woods, we find traces of the vow of
the sun-god. The trees are budding in buds of rosy hue, the willow
branches are decked with silvery catkins powdered with gold. The
larches, like slender dryads, wear a feathery garb of tender green,
and under the trees of the woods the primroses look up, like fallen
stars. Along the woodland path we go, treading on fragrant
pine-needles and on the beech leaves of last year that have not yet
lost their radiant amber. And, at a turn of the way, the sun-god
suddenly shines through the great dark branches of the giants of the
forest, and before us lies a patch of exquisite blue, as though a god
had robbed the sky and torn from it a precious fragment that seems
alive and moving, between the sun and the shadow.

And, as we look, the sun caresses it, and the South Wind gently moves
the little bell-shaped flowers of the wild hyacinth as it softly
sweeps across them. So does Hyacinthus live on; so do Apollo and
Zephyrus still love and mourn their friend.


FOOTNOTE:

[4] Legend says that on the petals of the hyacinth Apollo transcribed
the letters "AÃ¬,"--"Alas!"