THE DEATH OF BALDUR

    "I heard a voice, that cried,
    'Baldur the Beautiful
    Is dead, is dead!'
    And through the misty air
    Passed like the mournful cry
    Of sunward sailing cranes."

        Longfellow.


Among the gods of Greece we find gods and goddesses who do unworthy
deeds, but none to act the permanent part of villain of the play. In
the mythology of the Norsemen we have a god who is wholly treacherous
and evil, ever the villain of the piece, cunning, malicious,
vindictive, and cruel--the god Loki. And as his foil, and his victim,
we have Baldur, best of all gods, most beautiful, most greatly
beloved. Baldur was the Galahad of the court of Odin the king, his
father.

    "My strength is of the strength of ten,
    Because my heart is pure."

No impure thing was to be found in his dwelling; none could impugn his
courage, yet ever he counselled peace, ever was gentle and infinitely
wise, and his beauty was as the beauty of the whitest of all the
flowers of the Northland, called after him _Baldrsbr√°_. The god of the
Norsemen was essentially a god of battles, and we are told by great
authorities that Baldur was originally a hero who fought on the
earth, and who, in time, came to be deified. Even if it be so, it is
good to think that a race of warriors could worship one whose chief
qualities were wisdom, purity, and love.

In perfect happiness, loving and beloved, Baldur lived in Asgard with
his wife Nanna, until a night when his sleep was assailed by horrible
dreams of evil omen. In the morning he told the gods that he had
dreamed that Death, a thing till then unknown in Asgard, had come and
cruelly taken his life away. Solemnly the gods debated how this ill
happening might be averted, and Freya, his mother, fear for her best
beloved hanging heavy over her heart, took upon herself the task of
laying under oath fire and water, iron and all other metals, trees and
shrubs, birds, beasts and creeping things, to do no harm to Baldur.
With eager haste she went from place to place, nor did she fail to
exact the oath from anything in all nature, animate or inanimate, save
one only.

"A twig of mistletoe, tender and fair, grew high above the field," and
such a little thing it was, with its dainty green leaves and waxen
white berries, nestling for protection under the strong arm of a great
oak, that the goddess passed it by. Assuredly no scathe could come to
Baldur the Beautiful from a creature so insignificant, and Freya
returned to Asgard well pleased with her quest.

Then indeed was there joy and laughter amongst the gods, for each one
tried how he might slay Baldur, but neither sword nor stone, hammer
nor battle-axe could work him any ill.

Odin alone remained unsatisfied. Mounted on his eight-footed grey
steed, Sleipnir, he galloped off in haste to consult the giant
prophetess Angrbotha, who was dead and had to be followed to Niflheim,
the chilly underworld that lies far north from the world of men, and
where the sun never comes. Hel, the daughter of Loki and of Angrbotha,
was queen of this dark domain.

    "There, in a bitterly cold place, she received the souls
    of all who died of sickness or old age; care was her
    bed, hunger her dish, starvation her knife. Her walls
    were high and strong, and her bolts and bars huge; 'Half
    blue was her skin, and half the colour of human flesh. A
    goddess easy to know, and in all things very stern and
    grim.'"

        Dasent.

In her kingdom no soul that passed away in glorious battle was
received, nor any that fought out the last of life in a fierce combat
with the angry waves of the sea. Only those who died ingloriously were
her guests.

When he had reached the realm of Hel, Odin found that a feast was
being prepared, and the couches were spread, as for an honoured guest,
with rich tapestry and with gold. For many a year had Angrbotha rested
there in peace, and it was only by chanting a magic spell and tracing
those runes which have power to raise the dead that Odin awoke her.
When she raised herself, terrible and angry from her tomb, he did not
tell her that he was the mighty father of gods and men. He only asked
her for whom the great feast was prepared, and why Hel was spreading
her couches so gorgeously. And to the father of Baldur she revealed
the secret of the future, that Baldur was the expected guest, and that
by his blind brother Hodur his soul was to be hastened to the Shades.

"Who, then, would avenge him?" asked the father, great wrath in his
heart. And the prophetess replied that his death should be avenged by
Vali, his youngest brother, who should not wash his hands nor comb his
hair until he had brought the slayer of Baldur to the funeral pyre.
But yet another question Odin would fain have answered.

"_Who_," he asked, "_would refuse to weep at Baldur's death?_"

Thereat the prophetess, knowing that her questioner could be none
other than Odin, for to no mortal man could be known so much of the
future, refused for evermore to speak, and returned to the silence of
her tomb. And Odin was forced to mount his steed and to return to his
own land of warmth and pleasure.

On his return he found that all was well with Baldur. Thus he tried to
still his anxious heart and to forget the feast in the chill regions
of Niflheim, spread for the son who was to him the dearest, and to
laugh with those who tried in vain to bring scathe to Baldur.

Only one among those who looked at those sports and grew merry, as he
whom they loved stood like a great cliff against which the devouring
waves of the fierce North Sea beat and foam and crash in vain, had
malice in his heart as he beheld the wonder. In the evil heart of Loki
there came a desire to overthrow the god who was beloved by all gods
and by all men. He hated him because he was pure, and the mind of Loki
was as a stream into which all the filth of the world is discharged.
He hated him because Baldur was truth and loyalty, and he, Loki, was
treachery and dishonour. He hated him because to Loki there came never
a thought that was not full of meanness and greed and cruelty and
vice, and Baldur was indeed one _sans peur et sans reproche_.

Thus Loki, taking upon himself the form of a woman, went to Fensalir,
the palace, all silver and gold, where dwelt Freya, the mother of
Baldur.

The goddess sat, in happy majesty, spinning the clouds, and when Loki,
apparently a gentle old woman, passed by where she sat, and then
paused and asked, as if amazed, what were the shouts of merriment that
she heard, the smiling goddess replied:

"All things on earth have sworn to me never to injure Baldur, and all
the gods use their weapons against him in vain. Baldur is safe for
evermore."

"All things?" queried Loki.

And Freya answered, "All things but the mistletoe. No harm can come to
him from a thing so weak that it only lives by the lives of others."

Then the vicious heart of Loki grew joyous. Quickly he went to where
the mistletoe grew, cut a slender green branch, shaped it into a
point, and sought the blind god Hodur.

Hodur stood aside, while the other gods merrily pursued their sport.

"Why dost thou not take aim at Baldur with a weapon that fails and so
join in the laughter?" asked Loki.

And Hodur sadly made answer:

"Well dost thou know that darkness is my lot, nor have I ought to
cast at my brother."

Then Loki placed in his hand the shaft of mistletoe and guided his
aim, and well and surely Hodur cast the dart. He waited, then, for the
merry laughter that followed ever on the onslaught of those against
him whom none could do harm. But a great and terrible cry smote his
ears. "_Baldur the Beautiful is dead! is dead!_"

On the ground lay Baldur, a white flower cut down by the scythe of the
mower. And all through the realm of the gods, and all through the land
of the Northmen there arose a cry of bitter lamentation.

"That was the greatest woe that ever befell gods and men," says the
story.

The sound of terrible mourning in place of laughter brought Freya to
where

    "on the floor lay Baldur dead; and round lay thickly
    strewn swords, axes, darts, and spears, which all the
    gods in sport had lightly thrown at Baldur, whom no
    weapon pierced or clove; but in his breast stood fixed
    the fatal bough of mistletoe."

        Matthew Arnold.

When she saw what had befallen him, Freya's grief was a grief that
refused to be comforted, but when the gods, overwhelmed with sorrow,
knew not what course to take, she quickly commanded that one should
ride to Niflheim and offer Hel a ransom if she would permit Baldur to
return to Asgard.

Hermoder the Nimble, another of the sons of Odin, undertook the
mission, and, mounted on his father's eight-footed steed, he speedily
reached the ice-cold domain of Hel.

There he found Baldur, sitting on the noblest seat of those who
feasted, ruling among the people of the Underworld. With burning words
Hermoder pled with Hel that she would permit Baldur to return to the
world of gods and the world of men, by both of whom he was so dearly
beloved. Said Hel:

    "Come then! if Baldur was so dear beloved,
    And this is true, and such a loss is Heaven's--
    Hear, how to Heaven may Baldur be restored.
    Show me through all the world the signs of grief!
    Fails but one thing to grieve, here Baldur stops!
    Let all that lives and moves upon the earth
    Weep him, and all that is without life weep;
    Let Gods, men, brutes, beweep him; plants and stones,
    So shall I know the loss was dear indeed,
    And bend my heart, and give him back to Heaven."

        Matthew Arnold.

Gladly Hermoder made answer:

"All things shall weep for Baldur!"

Swiftly he made his perilous return journey, and at once, when the
gods heard what Hel had said, messengers were despatched all over the
earth to beg all things, living and dead, to weep for Baldur, and so
dear to all nature was the beautiful god, that the messengers
everywhere left behind them a track of the tears that they caused to
be shed.

Meantime, in Asgard, preparations were made for Baldur's pyre. The
longest of the pines in the forest were cut down by the gods, and
piled up in a mighty pyre on the deck of his great ship _Ringhorn_,
the largest in the world.

[Illustration: "BALDUR THE BEAUTIFUL IS DEAD"]

    "Seventy ells and four extended
    On the grass the vessel's keel;
    High above it, gilt and splendid,
    Rose the figure-head ferocious
    With its crest of steel."

        Longfellow.

Down to the seashore they bore the body, and laid it on the pyre with
rich gifts all round it, and the pine trunks of the Northern forests
that formed the pyre, they covered with gorgeous tapestries and
fragrant flowers. And when they had laid him there, with all love and
gentleness, and his fair young wife, Nanna, looked on his beautiful
still face, sorrow smote her heart so that it was broken, and she fell
down dead. Tenderly they laid her beside him, and by him, too, they
laid the bodies of his horse and his hounds, which they slew to bear
their master company in the land whither his soul had fled; and around
the pyre they twined thorns, the emblem of sleep.

Yet even then they looked for his speedy return, radiant and glad to
come home to a sunlit land of happiness. And when the messengers who
were to have brought tidings of his freedom were seen drawing near,
eagerly they crowded to hear the glad words, "_All creatures weep, and
Baldur shall return!_"

But with them they brought not hope, but despair. All things, living
and dead, had wept, save one only. A giantess who sat in a dark cave
had laughed them to scorn. With devilish merriment she mocked:

    "Neither in life, nor yet in death,
    Gave he me gladness.
    Let Hel keep her prey."

Then all knew that yet a second time had Baldur been betrayed, and
that the giantess was none other than Loki, and Loki, realising the
fierce wrath of Odin and of the other gods, fled before them, yet
could not escape his doom. And grief unspeakable was that of gods and
of men when they knew that in the chill realm of the inglorious dead
Baldur must remain until the twilight of the gods had come, until old
things had passed away, and all things had become new.

Not only the gods, but the giants of the storm and frost, and the
frost elves came to behold the last of him whom they loved. Then the
pyre was set alight, and the great vessel was launched, and glided out
to sea with its sails of flame.

    "They launched the burning ship!
    It floated far away
    Over the misty sea,
    Till like the sun it seemed,
    Sinking beneath the waves,
    Baldur returned no more!"

Yet, ere he parted from his dead son, Odin stooped over him and
whispered a word in his ear. And there are those who say that as the
gods in infinite sorrow stood on the beach staring out to sea,
darkness fell, and only a fiery track on the waves showed whither he
had gone whose passing had robbed Asgard and the Earth of their most
beautiful thing, heavy as the weight of chill Death's remorseless hand
would have been their hearts, but for the knowledge of that word. They
knew that with the death of Baldur the twilight of the gods had begun,
and that by much strife and infinite suffering down through the ages
the work of their purification and hallowing must be wrought. But when
all were fit to receive him, and peace and happiness reigned again on
earth and in heaven, Baldur would come back. For the word was
_Resurrection_.

    "So perish the old Gods!
    But out of the sea of time
    Rises a new land of song,
    Fairer than the old."

        Longfellow.

    "Heartily know,
    When half-gods go,
    The gods arrive."

        Emerson.