CHAPTER VI.

LEGENDS.

I

_About Saints._


As besides the songs or _pyesni_ there are current among the people a
number of _stikhi_ or poems on sacred subjects, so together with the
_skazki_ there have been retained in the popular memory a multitude of
_legendui_, or legends relating to persons or incidents mentioned in
the Bible or in ecclesiastical history. Many of them have been
extracted from the various apocryphal books which in olden times had
so wide a circulation, and many also from the lives of the Saints;
some of them may be traced to such adaptations of Indian legends as
the "Varlaam and Josaphat" attributed to St. John of Damascus; and
others appear to be ancient heathen traditions, which, with altered
names and slightly modified incidents, have been made to do service as
Christian narratives. But whatever may be their origin, they all bear
witness to the fact of their having been exposed to various
influences, and many of them may fairly be considered as relics of
hoar antiquity, memorials of that misty period when the pious
Slavonian chronicler struck by the confusion of Christian with heathen
ideas and ceremonies then prevalent, styled his countrymen a
two-faithed people.[424]

On the popular tales of a religious character current among the
Russian peasantry, the duality of their creed, or of that of their
ancestors, has produced a twofold effect. On the one hand, into
narratives drawn from purely Christian sources there has entered a
pagan element, most clearly perceptible in stories which deal with
demons and departed spirits; on the other hand, an attempt has been
made to give a Christian nature to what are manifestly heathen
legends, by lending saintly names to their characters and clothing
their ideas in an imitation of biblical language. Of such stories as
these, it will be as well to give a few specimens.

Among the legends borrowed from the apocryphal books and similar
writings, many of which are said to be still carefully preserved among
the "Schismatics," concealed in hiding-places of which the secret is
handed down from father to son--as was once the case with the Hussite
books among the Bohemians--there are many which relate to the creation
of the world and the early history of man. One of these states that
when the Lord had created Adam and Eve, he stationed at the gates of
Paradise the dog, then a clean beast, giving it strict orders not to
give admittance to the Evil One. But "the Evil One came to the gates
of Paradise, and threw the dog a piece of bread, and the dog went and
let the Evil One into Paradise. Then the Evil One set to work and spat
over Adam and Eve--covered them all over with spittle, from the head
to the little toe of the left foot." Thence is it that spittle is
impure (_pogana_). So Adam and Eve were turned out of Paradise, and
the Lord said to the dog:

"Listen, O Dog! thou wert a Dog (_Sobaka_), a clean beast; through all
Paradise the most holy didst thou roam. Henceforward shalt thou be a
Hound (_Pes_, or _Pyos_), an unclean beast. Into a dwelling it shall
be a sin to admit thee; into a church if thou dost run, the church
must be consecrated anew."

And so--the story concludes--"ever since that time it has been called
not a dog but a hound--skin-deep it is unclean (_pogana_), but clean
within."

According to another story, when men first inhabited the earth, they
did not know how to build houses, so as to keep themselves warm in
winter. But instead of asking aid from the Lord, they applied to the
Devil, who taught them how to make an _izba_ or ordinary Russian
cottage. Following his instructions, they made wooden houses, each of
which had a door but no window. Inside these huts it was warm; but
there was no living in them, on account of the darkness. "So the
people went back to the Evil One. The Evil one strove and strove, but
nothing came of it, the izba still remained pitch dark. Then the
people prayed unto the Lord. And the Lord said: 'Hew out a window!' So
they hewed out windows, and it became light."[425]

Some of the Russian traditions about the creation of man are closely
connected with Teutonic myths. The Schismatics called _Dukhobortsui_,
or Spirit-Wrestlers, for instance, hold that man was composed of
earthly materials, but that God breathed into his body the breath of
life. "His flesh was made of earth, his bones of stone, his veins of
roots, his blood of water, his hair of grass, his thought of the wind,
his spirit of the cloud."[426] Many of the Russian stories about the
early ages of the world, also, are current in Western Europe, such as
that about the rye--which in olden days was a mass of ears from top to
bottom. But some lazy harvest-women having cursed "God's corn," the
Lord waxed wroth and began to strip the ears from the stem. But when
the last ear was about to fall, the Lord had pity upon the penitent
culprits, and allowed the single ear to remain as we now see it.[427]

A Little-Russian variant of this story says that Ilya (Elijah), was so
angry at seeing the base uses to which a woman turned "God's corn,"
that he began to destroy all the corn in the world. But a dog begged
for, and received a few ears. From these, after Ilya's wrath was
spent, mankind obtained seed, and corn began to grow again on the face
of the earth, but not in its pristine bulk and beauty. It is on
account of the good service thus rendered to our race that we ought to
cherish and feed the dog.[428]

Another story, from the Archangel Government, tells how a certain
King, as he roamed afield with his princes and boyars, found a grain
of corn as large as a sparrow's egg. Marvelling greatly at its size,
he tried in vain to obtain from his followers some explanation
thereof. Then they bethought them of "a certain man from among the old
people, who might be able to tell them something about it." But when
the old man came, "scarcely able to crawl along on a pair of
crutches," he said he knew nothing about it, but perhaps his father
might remember something. So they sent for his father, who came
limping along with the help of one crutch, and who said:

"I have a father living, in whose granary I have seen just such a
seed."

So they sent for his father, a man a hundred and seventy years old.
And the patriarch came, walking nimbly needing neither guide nor
crutch. Then the King began to question him, saying:

"Who sowed this sort of corn?"

"I sowed it, and reaped it," answered the old man, "and now I have
some of it in my granary. I keep it as a memorial. When I was young,
the grain was large and plentiful, but after a time it began to grow
smaller and smaller."

"Now tell me," asked the King, "how comes it, old man, that thou goest
more nimbly than thy son and thy grandson?"

"Because I lived according to the law of the Lord," answered the old
man. "I held mine own, I grasped not at what was another's."[429]

The existence of hills is accounted for by legendary lore in this
wise. When the Lord was about to fashion the face of the earth, he
ordered the Devil to dive into the watery depths and bring thence a
handful of the soil he found at the bottom. The Devil obeyed, but when
he filled his hand, he filled his mouth also. The Lord took the soil,
sprinkled it around, and the Earth appeared, all perfectly flat. The
Devil, whose mouth was quite full, looked on for some time in silence.
At last he tried to speak, but choked, and fled in terror. After him
followed the thunder and the lightning, and so he rushed over the
whole face of the earth, hills springing up where he coughed, and
sky-cleaving mountains where he leaped.[430]

As in other countries, a number of legends are current respecting
various animals. Thus the Old Ritualists will not eat the crayfish
(_rak_), holding that it was created by the Devil. On the other hand
the snake (_uzh_, the harmless or common snake) is highly esteemed,
for tradition says that when the Devil, in the form of a mouse, had
gnawed a hole in the Ark, and thereby endangered the safety of Noah
and his family, the snake stopped up the leak with its head.[431] The
flesh of the horse is considered unclean, because when the infant
Saviour was hidden in the manger the horse kept eating the hay under
which the babe was concealed, whereas the ox not only would not touch
it, but brought back hay on its horns to replace what the horse had
eaten. According to an old Lithuanian tradition, the shape of the sole
is due to the fact that the Queen of the Baltic Sea once ate one half
of it and threw the other half into the sea again. A legend from the
Kherson Government accounts for it as follows. At the time of the
Angelical Salutation, the Blessed Virgin told the Archangel Gabriel
that she would give credit to his words "if a fish, one side of which
had already been eaten, were to come to life again. That very moment
the fish came to life, and was put back in the water."

With the birds many graceful legends are connected. There is a bird,
probably the peewit, which during dry weather may be seen always on
the wing, and piteously crying _Peet, Peet_,[432] as if begging for
water. Of it the following tale is told. When God created the earth,
and determined to supply it with seas, lakes and rivers, he ordered
the birds to convey the waters to their appointed places. They all
obeyed except this bird, which refused to fulfil its duty, saying that
it had no need of seas, lakes or rivers, to slake its thirst. Then the
Lord waxed wroth and forbade it and its posterity ever to approach a
sea or stream, allowing it to quench its thirst with that water only
which remains in hollows and among stones after rain. From that time
it has never ceased its wailing cry of "Drink, Drink," _Peet,
Peet_.[433]

When the Jews were seeking for Christ in the garden, says a Kharkof
legend, all the birds, except the sparrow, tried to draw them away
from his hiding-place. Only the sparrow attracted them thither by its
shrill chirruping. Then the Lord cursed the sparrow, and forbade that
men should eat of its flesh. In other parts of Russia, tradition tells
that before the crucifixion the swallows carried off the nails
provided for the use of the executioners, but the sparrows brought
them back. And while our Lord was hanging on the cross the sparrows
were maliciously exclaiming _Jif! Jif!_ or "He is living! He is
living!" in order to urge on the tormentors to fresh cruelties. But
the swallows cried, with opposite intent, _Umer! Umer!_ "He is dead!
He is dead." Therefore it is that to kill a swallow is a sin, and that
its nest brings good luck to a house. But the sparrow is an unwelcome
guest, whose entry into a cottage is a presage of woe. As a punishment
for its sins, its legs have been fastened together by invisible bonds,
and therefore it always hops, not being able to run.[434]

A great number of the Russian legends refer to the visits which Christ
and his Apostles are supposed to pay to men's houses at various times,
but especially during the period between Easter Sunday and Ascension
Day. In the guise of indigent wayfarers, the sacred visitors enter
into farm-houses and cottages and ask for food and lodging; therefore
to this day the Russian peasant is ever unwilling to refuse
hospitality to any man, fearing lest he might repulse angels unawares.
Tales of this kind are common in all Christian lands, especially in
those in which their folk-lore has preserved some traces of the old
faith in the heathen gods who once walked the earth, and in
patriarchal fashion dispensed justice among men. Many of the Russian
stories closely resemble those of a similar nature which occur in
German and Scandinavian collections; all of them, for instance,
agreeing in the unfavorable light in which they place St. Peter. The
following abridgment of the legend of "The Poor Widow,"[435] may be
taken as a specimen of the Russian tales of this class.

Long, long ago, Christ and his twelve Apostles were wandering about
the world, and they entered into a village one evening, and asked a
rich moujik to allow them to spend the night in his house. But he
would not admit them, crying:

"Yonder lives a widow who takes in beggars; go to her."

So they went to the widow, and asked her. Now she was so poor that
she had nothing in the house but a crust of bread and a handful of
flour. She had a cow, but it had not calved yet, and gave no milk. But
she did all she could for the wayfarers, setting before them all the
food she had, and letting them sleep beneath her roof. And her store
of bread and flour was wonderfully increased, so that her guests fed
and were satisfied. And the next morning they set out anew on their
journey.

As they went along the road there met them a wolf. And it fell down
before the Lord, and begged for food. Then said the Lord, "Go to the
poor widow's; slay her cow, and eat."

The Apostles remonstrated in vain. The wolf set off, entered the
widow's cow-house, and killed her cow. And when she heard what had
taken place, she only said:

"The Lord gave, the Lord has taken away. Holy is His will!"

As the sacred wayfarers pursued their journey, there came rolling
towards them a barrel full of money. Then the Lord addressed it,
saying:

"Roll, O barrel, into the farmyard of the rich moujik!"

Again the Apostles vainly remonstrated. The barrel went its way, and
the rich moujik found it, and stowed it away, grumbling the while:

"The Lord might as well have sent twice as much!"

The sun rose higher, and the Apostles began to thirst. Then said the
Lord:

"Follow that road, and ye will find a well; there drink your fill."

They went along that road and found the well. But they could not
drink thereat, for its water was foul and impure, and swarming with
snakes and frogs and toads. So they returned to where the Lord awaited
them, described what they had seen, and resumed their journey. After a
time they were sent in search of another well. And this time they
found a place wherein was water pure and cool, and around grew
wondrous trees, whereon heavenly birds sat singing. And when they had
slaked their thirst, they returned unto the Lord, who said:

"Wherefore did ye tarry so long?"

"We only stayed while we were drinking," replied the Apostles. "We did
not spend above three minutes there in all."

"Not three minutes did ye spend there, but three whole years," replied
the Lord. "As it was in the first well, so will it be in the other
world with the rich moujik! But as it was in the second well, so will
it be in that world with the poor widow!"

Sometimes our Lord is supposed to wander by himself, under the guise
of a beggar. In the story of "Christ's Brother"[436] a young
man--whose father, on his deathbed, had charged him not to forget the
poor--goes to church on Easter Day, having provided himself with red
eggs to give to the beggars with whom he should exchange the Pascal
greeting. After exhausting his stock of presents, he finds that there
remains one beggar of miserable appearance to whom he has nothing to
offer, so he takes him home to dinner. After the meal the beggar
exchanges crosses with his host,[437] giving him "a cross which blazes
like fire," and invites him to pay him a visit on the following
Tuesday. To an enquiry about the way, he replies, "You have only to go
along yonder path and say, 'Grant thy blessing, O Lord!' and you will
come to where I am."

The young man does as he is told, and commences his journey on the
Tuesday. On his way he hears voices, as though of children, crying, "O
Christ's brother, ask Christ for us--have we to suffer long?" A little
later he sees a group of girls who are ladling water from one well
into another, who make the same request. At last he arrives at the end
of his journey, finds the aged mendicant who had adopted him as his
brother, and recognizes him as "the Lord Jesus Christ Himself." The
youth relates what he has seen, and asks:

"Wherefore, O Lord, are the children suffering?"

"Their mothers cursed them while still unborn," is the reply.
"Therefore is it impossible for them to enter into Paradise."

"And the girls?"

"They used to sell milk, and they put water into the milk. Now they
are doomed to pour water from well to well eternally."

After this the youth is taken into Paradise, and brought to the place
there provided for him.[438]

Sometimes the sacred visitor rewards with temporal goods the kindly
host who has hospitably received him. Thus the story of "Beer and
Corn"[439] tells how a certain man was so poor that when the rest of
the peasants were brewing beer, and making other preparations to
celebrate an approaching feast of the Church, he found his cupboard
perfectly bare. In vain did he apply to a rich neighbor, who was in
the habit of lending goods and money at usurious rates; having no
security to offer, he could borrow nothing. But on the eve of the
festival, when he was sitting at home in sadness, he suddenly rose and
drew near to the sacred painting which hung in the corner, and sighed
heavily, and said,

"O Lord! forgive me, sinner that I am! I have not even wherewith to
buy oil, so as to light the lamp before the image[440] for the
festival!"

Soon afterwards an old man entered the cottage, and obtained leave to
spend the night there. After a time the guest enquired why his host
was so sad, and on learning the reason, told him to go again to his
rich neighbor and borrow a quarter of malt. The moujik obeyed, and
soon returned with the malt, which the old man ordered him to throw
into his well. When this was done the villager and his guest went to
bed.

Next morning the old man told his guest to borrow a number of tubs,
and fill them with liquor drawn from the well, and then to make his
neighbors assemble and drink it. He did so, and the buckets were
filled with "such beer as neither fancy nor imagination can conceive,
but only a skazka can describe." The villagers, excited by the news,
collected in crowds, and drank the beer and rejoiced. Last of all came
the rich neighbor, begging to know how such wonderful beer was brewed.
The moujik told him the whole story, whereupon he straightway
commanded his servants to pour all his best malt into his well. And
next day he hastened to the well to taste the liquor it contained; but
he found nothing but malt and water; not a drop of beer was there.

We may take next the legends current among the peasantry about
various saints. Of these, the story of "The Prophet Elijah and St.
Nicholas," will serve as a good specimen. But, in order to render it
intelligible, a few words about "Ilya the Prophet," as Elijah is
styled in Russia, may as well be prefixed.

It is well known that in the days of heathenism the Slavonians
worshipped a thunder-god, Perun,[441] who occupied in their
mythological system the place which in the Teutonic was assigned to a
Donar or a Thor. He was believed, if traditions may be relied upon, to
sway the elements, often driving across the sky in a flaming car, and
launching the shafts of the lightning at his demon foes. His name is
still preserved by the western and southern Slavonians in many local
phrases, especially in imprecations; but, with the introduction of
Christianity into Slavonic lands, all this worship of his divinity
came to an end. Then took place, as had occurred before in other
countries, the merging of numerous portions of the old faith in the
new, the transferring of many of the attributes of the old gods to the
sacred personages of the new religion.[442] During this period of
transition the ideas which were formerly associated with the person of
Perun, the thunder-god, became attached to that of the Prophet Ilya or
Elijah.

One of the causes which conduced to this result may have been--if
Perun really was considered in old times, as he is said to have been,
the Lord of the Harvest--that the day consecrated by the Church to
Elijah, July 20, occurs in the beginning of the harvest season, and
therefore the peasants naturally connected their new saint with their
old deity. But with more certainty may it be accepted that, the
leading cause was the similarity which appeared to the recent converts
to prevail between their dethroned thunder-god and the prophet who was
connected with drought and with rain, whose enemies were consumed by
fire from on high, and on whom waited "a chariot of fire and horses of
fire," when he was caught up by a whirlwind into heaven. And so at the
present day, according to Russian tradition, the Prophet Ilya thunders
across the sky in a flaming car, and smites the clouds with the darts
of the lightning. In the Vladimir Government he is said "to destroy
devils with stone arrows,"--weapons corresponding to the hammer of
Thor and the lance of Indra. On his day the peasants everywhere expect
thunder and rain, and in some places they set out rye and oats on
their gates, and ask their clergy to laud the name of Ilya, that he
may bless their cornfields with plenteousness. There are districts,
also, in which the people go to church in a body on Ilya's day, and
after the service is over they kill and roast a beast which has been
purchased at the expense of the community. Its flesh is cut up into
small pieces and sold, the money paid for it going to the church. To
stay away from this ceremony, or not to purchase a piece of the meat,
would be considered a great sin; to mow or make hay on that day would
be to incur a terrible risk, for Ilya might smite the field with the
thunder, or burn up the crop with the lightning. In the old Novgorod
there used to be two churches, the one dedicated to "Ilya the Wet,"
the other to "Ilya the Dry." To these a cross-bearing procession was
made when a change in the weather was desired: to the former in times
of drought, to the latter when injury was being done to the crops by
rain. Diseases being considered to be evil spirits, invalids used to
pray to the thunder-god for relief. And so, at the present day, a
_zagovor_ or spell against the Siberian cattle-plague entreats the
"Holy Prophet of God Ilya," to send "thirty angels in golden array,
with bows and with arrows" to destroy it. The Servians say that at the
division of the world Ilya received the thunder and lightning as his
share, and that the crash and blaze of the storm are signs of his
contest with the devil. Wherefore the faithful ought not to cross
themselves when the thunder peals, lest the evil one should take
refuge from the heavenly weapons behind the protecting cross. The
Bulgarians say that forked lightning is the lance of Ilya who is
chasing the Lamia fiend: summer lightning is due to the sheen of that
lance, or to the fire issuing from the nostrils of his celestial
steeds. The white clouds of summer are named by them his heavenly
sheep, and they say that he compels the spirits of dead Gypsies to
form pellets of snow--by men styled hail--with which he scourges in
summer the fields of sinners.[443]

Such are a few of the ideas connected by Slavonian tradition with the
person of the Prophet Elijah or Ilya. To St. Nicholas, who has
succeeded to the place occupied by an ancient ruler of the waters, a
milder character is attributed than to Ilya, the thunder-god's
successor. As Ilya is the counterpart of Thor, so does Nicholas in
some respects resemble Odin. The special characteristics of the Saint
and the Prophet are fairly contrasted in the following story.


  ELIJAH THE PROPHET AND NICHOLAS.[444]

  A long while ago there lived a Moujik. Nicholas's day he
  always kept holy, but Elijah's not a bit; he would even work
  upon it. In honor of St. Nicholas he would have a taper lighted
  and a service performed, but about Elijah the Prophet he
  forgot so much as to think.

  Well, it happened one day that Elijah and Nicholas were
  walking over the land belonging to this Moujik; and as they
  walked they looked--in the cornfields the green blades were
  growing up so splendidly that it did one's heart good to look at
  them.

  "Here'll be a good harvest, a right good harvest!" says
  Nicholas, "and the Moujik, too, is a good fellow sure enough,
  both honest and pious: one who remembers God and thinks
  about the Saints! It will fall into good hands--"

  "We'll see by-and-by whether much will fall to his share!"
  answered Elijah; "when I've burnt up all his land with lightning,
  and beaten it all flat with hail, then this Moujik of yours will
  know what's right, and will learn to keep Elijah's day holy."

  Well, they wrangled and wrangled; then they parted asunder.
  St. Nicholas went off straight to the Moujik and said:

  "Sell all your corn at once, just as it stands, to the Priest
  of Elijah.[445] If you don't, nothing will be left of it: it will all be
  beaten flat by hail."

  Off rushed the Moujik to the Priest.

  "Won't your Reverence buy some standing corn? I'll sell
  my whole crop. I'm in such pressing need of money just now.
  It's a case of pay up with me! Buy it, Father! I'll sell it
  cheap."

  They bargained and bargained, and came to an agreement.
  The Moujik got his money and went home.

  Some little time passed by. There gathered together, there
  came rolling up, a stormcloud; with a terrible raining and hailing
  did it empty itself over the Moujik's cornfields, cutting
  down all the crop as if with a knife--not even a single blade did
  it leave standing.

  Next day Elijah and Nicholas walked past. Says Elijah:

  "Only see how I've devastated the Moujik's cornfield!"

  "The Moujik's! No, brother! Devastated it you have
  splendidly, only that field belongs to the Elijah Priest, not to
  the Moujik."

  "To the Priest! How's that?"

  "Why, this way. The Moujik sold it last week to the
  Elijah Priest, and got all the money for it. And so, methinks,
  the Priest may whistle for his money!"

  "Stop a bit!" said Elijah. "I'll set the field all right again.
  It shall be twice as good as it was before."

  They finished talking, and went each his own way. St.
  Nicholas returned to the Moujik, and said:

  "Go to the Priest and buy back your crop--you won't lose
  anything by it."

  The Moujik went to the Priest, made his bow, and said:

  "I see, your Reverence, God has sent you a misfortune--the
  hail has beaten the whole field so flat you might roll a ball
  over it. Since things are so, let's go halves in the loss. I'll
  take my field back, and here's half of your money for you to
  relieve your distress."

  The Priest was rejoiced, and they immediately struck hands
  on the bargain.

  Meanwhile--goodness knows how--the Moujik's ground
  began to get all right. From the old roots shot forth new tender
  stems. Rain-clouds came sailing exactly over the cornfield
  and gave the soil to drink. There sprang up a marvellous crop--tall
  and thick. As to weeds, there positively was not one to be
  seen. And the ears grew fuller and fuller, till they were fairly
  bent right down to the ground.

  Then the dear sun glowed, and the rye grew ripe--like so
  much gold did it stand in the fields. Many a sheaf did the
  Moujik gather, many a heap of sheaves did he set up; and now
  he was beginning to carry the crop, and to gather it together into
  ricks.

  At that very time Elijah and Nicholas came walking by
  again. Joyfully did the Prophet gaze on all the land, and say:

  "Only look, Nicholas! what a blessing! Why, I have rewarded
  the Priest in such wise, that he will never forget it all
  his life."

  "The Priest? No, brother! the blessing indeed is great,
  but this land, you see, belongs to the Moujik. The Priest
  hasn't got anything whatsoever to do with it."

  "What are you talking about?"

  "It's perfectly true. When the hail beat all the cornfield
  flat, the Moujik went to the Priest and bought it back again at
  half price."

  "Stop a bit!" says Elijah. "I'll take the profit out of the
  corn. However many sheaves the Moujik may lay on the
  threshing-floor, he shall never thresh out of them more than a
  peck[446] at a time."

  "A bad piece of work!" thinks St. Nicholas. Off he went
  at once to the Moujik.

  "Mind," says he, "when you begin threshing your corn,
  never put more than one sheaf at a time on the threshing-floor."

  The Moujik began to thresh: from every sheaf he got a peck
  of grain. All his bins, all his storehouses, he crammed with
  rye; but still much remained over. So he built himself new
  barns, and filled them as full as they could hold.

  Well, one day Elijah and Nicholas came walking past his
  homestead, and the Prophet began looking here and there, and
  said:

  "Do you see what barns he's built? has he got anything to
  put into them?"

  "They're quite full already," answers Nicholas.

  "Why, wherever did the Moujik get such a lot of grain?"

  "Bless me! Why, every one of his sheaves gave him a
  peck of grain. When he began to thresh he never put more
  than one sheaf at a time on the threshing-floor."

  "Ah, brother Nicholas!" said Elijah, guessing the truth,
  "it's you who go and tell the Moujik everything!"

  "What an idea! that I should go and tell--"

  "As you please; that's your doing! But that Moujik sha'n't
  forget me in a hurry!"

  "Why, what are you going to do to him?"

  "What I shall do, that I won't tell you," replies Elijah.

  "There's a great danger coming," thinks St. Nicholas, and
  he goes to the Moujik again, and says:

  "Buy two tapers, a big one and a little one, and do thus
  and thus with them."

  Well, next day the Prophet Elijah and St. Nicholas were
  walking along together in the guise of wayfarers, and they met
  the Moujik, who was carrying two wax tapers--one, a big
  rouble one, and the other, a tiny copeck one.

  "Where are you going, Moujik?" asked St. Nicholas.

  "Well, I'm going to offer a rouble taper to Prophet Elijah;
  he's been ever so good to me! When my crops were ruined
  by the hail, he bestirred himself like anything, and gave me
  a plentiful harvest, twice as good as the other would have
  been."

  "And the copeck taper, what's that for?"

  "Why, that's for Nicholas!" said the peasant and passed
  on.

  "There now, Elijah!" says Nicholas, "you say I go and
  tell everything to the Moujik--surely you can see for yourself
  how much truth there is in that!"

  Thereupon the matter ended. Elijah was appeased and
  didn't threaten to hurt the Moujik any more. And the Moujik
  led a prosperous life, and from that time forward he held in
  equal honor Elijah's Day and Nicholas's Day.

It is not always to the Prophet Ilya that the power once attributed to
Perun is now ascribed. The pagan wielder of the thunderbolt is
represented in modern traditions by more than one Christian saint.
Sometimes, as St. George, he transfixes monsters with his lance;
sometimes, as St. Andrew, he smites with his mace a spot given over to
witchcraft. There was a village (says one of the legends of the
Chernigof Government) in which lived more than a thousand witches, and
they used to steal the holy stars, until at last "there was not one
left to light our sinful world." Then God sent the holy Andrew, who
struck with his mace--and all that village was swallowed up by the
earth, and the place thereof became a swamp.[447]

About St. George many stories are told, and still more ballads (if we
may be allowed to call them so) are sung. Under the names of Georgy,
Yury, and Yegory the Brave, he is celebrated as a patron as well of
wolves as of flocks and herds, as a Christian Confessor struggling and
suffering for the faith amid pagan foes, and as a chivalrous destroyer
of snakes and dragons. The discrepancies which exist between the
various representations given of his character and his functions are
very glaring, but they may be explained by the fact that a number of
legendary ideas sprung from separate sources have become associated
with his name; so that in one story his actions are in keeping with
the character of an old Slavonian deity, in another, with that of a
Christian or a Buddhist saint.

In some parts of Russia, when the cattle go out for the first time to
the spring pastures, a pie, made in the form of a sheep, is cut up by
the chief herdsman, and the fragments are preserved as a remedy
against the diseases to which sheep are liable. On St. George's Day in
spring, April 23, the fields are sanctified by a church service, at
the end of which they are sprinkled with holy water. In the Tula
Government a similar service is held over the wells. On the same day,
in some parts of Russia, a youth (who is called by the Slovenes the
Green Yegory) is dressed like our own "Jack in the Green," with
foliage and flowers. Holding a lighted torch in one hand and a pie in
the other, he goes out to the cornfields, followed by girls singing
appropriate songs. A circle of brushwood is then lighted, in the
centre of which is set the pie. All who take part in the ceremony then
sit down around the fire, and eventually the pie is divided among
them.

Numerous legends speak of the strange connection which exists between
St. George and the Wolf. In Little Russia that animal is called "St.
George's Dog," and the carcases of sheep which wolves have killed are
not used for human food, it being held that they have been assigned by
divine command to the beasts of the field. The human victim whom St.
George has doomed to be thus destroyed nothing can save. A man, to
whom such a fate had been allotted, tried to escape from his
assailants by hiding behind a stove; but a wolf transformed itself
into a cat, and at midnight, when all was still, it stole into the
house and seized the appointed prey. A hunter, who had been similarly
doomed, went on killing wolves for some time, and hanging up their
skins; but when the fatal hour arrived, one of the skins became a
wolf, and slew him by whom it had before been slain. In Little Russia
the wolves have their own herdsman[448]--a being like unto a man, who
is often seen in company with St. George. There were two brothers
(says a popular tale), the one rich, the other poor. The poor brother
had climbed up a tree one night, and suddenly he saw beneath him what
seemed to be two men--the one driving a pack of wolves, the other
attending to the conveyance of a quantity of bread. These two beings
were St. George and the Lisun. And St. George distributed the bread
among the wolves, and one loaf which remained over he gave to the poor
brother; who afterwards found that it was of a miraculous nature,
always renewing itself and so supplying its owner with an
inexhaustible store of bread. The rich brother, hearing the story,
climbed up the tree one night in hopes of obtaining a similar present.
But that night St. George found that he had no bread to give to one of
his wolves, so he gave it the rich brother instead.[449]

One of the legends attributes strange forgetfulness on one occasion to
St. George. A certain Gypsy who had a wife and seven children, and
nothing to feed them with, was standing by a roadside lost in
reflection, when Yegory the Brave came riding by. Hearing that the
saint was on his way to heaven, the Gypsy besought him to ask of God
how he was to support his family. St. George promised to do so, but
forgot. Again the Gypsy saw him riding past, and again the saint
promised and forgot. In a third interview the Gypsy asked him to leave
behind his golden stirrup as a pledge.

A third time St. George leaves the presence of the Lord without
remembering the commission with which he has been entrusted. But when
he is about to mount his charger the sight of the solitary stirrup
recalls it to his mind. So he returns and states the Gypsy's request,
and obtains the reply that "the Gypsy's business is to cheat and to
swear falsely." As soon as the Gypsy is told this, he thanks the Saint
and goes off home.

"Where are you going?" cries Yegory. "Give me back my golden stirrup."

"What stirrup?" asks the Gypsy.

"Why, the one you took from me."

"When did I take one from you? I see you now for the first time in my
life, and never a stirrup did I ever take, so help me Heaven!"

So Yegory had to go away without getting his stirrup back.[450]

There is an interesting Bulgarian legend in which St. George appears
in his Christian capacity of dragon-slayer, but surrounded by
personages belonging to heathen mythology. The inhabitants of the
pagan city of Troyan, it states, "did not believe in Christ, but in
gold and silver." Now there were seventy conduits in that city which
supplied it with spring-water; and the Lord made these conduits run
with liquid gold and silver instead of water, so that all the people
had as much as they pleased of the metals they worshipped, but they
had nothing to drink.

After a time the Lord took pity upon them, and there appeared at a
little distance from the city a deep lake. To this they used to go for
water. Only the lake was guarded by a terrible monster, which daily
devoured a maiden, whom the inhabitants of Troyan were obliged to give
to it in return for leave to make use of the lake. This went on for
three years, at the end of which time it fell to the lot of the king's
daughter to be sacrificed by the monster. But when the Troyan
Andromeda was exposed on the shore of the lake, a Perseus arrived to
save her in the form of St. George. While waiting for the monster to
appear, the saint laid his head on her knees, and she dressed his
locks. Then he fell into so deep a slumber that the monster drew nigh
without awaking him. But the Princess began to weep bitterly, and her
scalding tears fell on the face of St. George and awoke him, and he
slew the monster, and afterwards converted all the inhabitants of
Troyan to Christianity.[451]

St. Nicholas generally maintains in the legends the kindly character
attributed to him in the story in which he and the Prophet Ilya are
introduced together. It is to him that at the present day the anxious
peasant turns most readily for help, and it is he whom the legends
represent as being the most prompt of all the heavenly host to assist
the unfortunate among mankind. Thus in one of the stories a peasant is
driving along a heavy road one autumn day, when his cart sticks fast
in the mire. Just then St. Kasian comes by.

"Help me, brother, to get my cart out of the mud!" says the peasant.

"Get along with you!" replies St. Kasian. "Do you suppose I've got
leisure to be dawdling here with you!"

Presently St. Nicholas comes that way. The peasant addresses the same
request to him, and he stops and gives the required assistance.

When the two saints arrive in heaven, the Lord asks them where they
have been.

"I have been on the earth," replies St. Kasian. "And I happened to
pass by a moujik whose cart had stuck in the mud. He cried out to me,
saying, 'Help me to get my cart out!' But I was not going to spoil my
heavenly apparel."

"I have been on the earth," says St. Nicholas, whose clothes were all
covered with mud. "I went along that same road, and I helped the
moujik to get his cart free."

Then the Lord says, "Listen, Kasian! Because thou didst not assist the
moujik, therefore shall men honor thee by thanksgiving once only every
four years. But to thee, Nicholas, because thou didst assist the
moujik to set free his cart, shall men twice every year offer up
thanksgiving."

"Ever since that time," says the story, "it has been customary to
offer prayers and thanksgiving (_molebnui_) to Nicholas twice a year,
but to Kasian only once every leap-year."[452]

In another story St. Nicholas comes to the aid of an adventurer who
watches beside the coffin of a bewitched princess. There were two
moujiks in a certain village, we are told, one of whom was very rich
and the other very poor. One day the poor man, who was in great
distress, went to the house of the rich man and begged for a loan.

"I will repay it, on my word. Here is Nicholas as a surety," he cried,
pointing to a picture of St. Nicholas.

Thereupon the rich man lent him twenty roubles. The day for repayment
came, but the poor man had not a single copeck. Furious at his loss,
the rich man rushed to the picture of St. Nicholas, crying--

"Why don't you pay up for that pauper? You stood surety for him,
didn't you?"

And as the picture made no reply, he tore it down from the wall, set
it on a cart and drove it away, flogging it as he went, and crying--

"Pay me my money! Pay me my money!"

As he drove past the inn a young merchant saw him, and cried--

"What are you doing, you infidel!"

The moujik explained that as he could not get his money back from a
man who was in his debt, he was proceeding against a surety; whereupon
the merchant paid the debt, and thereby ransomed the picture, which he
hung up in a place of honor, and kept a lamp burning before it. Soon
afterwards an old man offered his services to the merchant, who
appointed him his manager; and from that time all things went well
with the merchant.

But after a while a misfortune befell the land in which he lived, for
"an evil witch enchanted the king's daughter, who lay dead all day
long, but at night got up and ate people." So she was shut up in a
coffin and placed in a church, and her hand, with half the kingdom as
her dowry, was offered to any one who could disenchant her. The
merchant, in accordance with his old manager's instructions, undertook
the task, and after a series of adventures succeeded in accomplishing
it. The last words of one of the narrators of the story are, "Now this
old one was no mere man. He was Nicholas himself, the saint of
God."[453]

With one more legend about this favorite saint, I will conclude this
section of the present chapter. In some of its incidents it closely
resembles the story of "The Smith and the Demon," which was quoted in
the first chapter.


  THE PRIEST WITH THE GREEDY EYES.[454]

  In the parish of St. Nicholas there lived a Pope. This
  Pope's eyes were thoroughly pope-like.[455] He served Nicholas
  several years, and went on serving until such time as there
  remained to him nothing either for board or lodging. Then our
  Pope collected all the church keys, looked at the picture of
  Nicholas, thumped him, out of spite, over the shoulders with
  the keys, and went forth from his parish as his eyes led him.
  And as he walked along the road he suddenly lighted upon an
  unknown man.

  "Hail, good man!" said the stranger to the Pope. "Whence
  do you come and whither are you going? Take me with you
  as a companion."

  Well, they went on together. They walked and walked for
  several versts, then they grew tired. It was time to seek repose.
  Now the Pope had a few biscuits in his cassock, and the companion
  he had picked up had a couple of small loaves.[456]

  "Let's eat your loaves first," says the Pope, "and afterwards
  we'll take to the biscuits, too."

  "Agreed!" replies the stranger. "We'll eat my loaves,
  and keep your biscuits for afterwards."

  Well, they ate away at the loaves; each of them ate his fill,
  but the loaves got no smaller. The Pope grew envious:
  "Come," thinks he, "I'll steal them from him!" After the
  meal the old man lay down to take a nap, but the Pope kept
  scheming how to steal the loaves from him. The old man went
  to sleep. The Pope drew the loaves out of his pocket and
  began quietly nibbling them at his seat. The old man awoke
  and felt for his loaves; they were gone!

  "Where are my loaves?" he exclaimed; "who has eaten
  them? was it you, Pope?"

  "No, not I, on my word!" replied the Pope.

  "Well, so be it," said the old man.

  They gave themselves a shake, and set out again on their
  journey. They walked and walked; suddenly the road branched
  off in two different directions. Well, they both went the same
  way, and soon reached a certain country. In that country the
  King's daughter lay at the point of death, and the King had given
  notice that to him who should cure his daughter he would give
  half of his kingdom, and half of his goods and possessions; but
  if any one undertook to cure her and failed, he should have his
  head chopped off and hung up on a stake. Well, they arrived,
  elbowed their way among the people in front of the King's palace,
  and gave out that they were doctors. The servant came out
  from the King's palace, and began questioning them:

  "Who are you? from what cities, of what families? what
  do you want?"

  "We are doctors," they replied; "we can cure the Princess!"

  "Oh! if you are doctors, come into the palace."

  So they went into the palace, saw the Princess, and asked
  the King to supply them with a private apartment, a tub of
  water, a sharp sword, and a big table. The King supplied
  them with all these things. Then they shut themselves up in
  the private apartment, laid the Princess on the big table, cut
  her into small pieces with the sharp sword, flung them into the
  tub of water, washed them, and rinsed them. Afterwards they
  began putting the pieces together; when the old man breathed
  on them the different pieces stuck together. When he had put
  all the pieces together properly, he gave them a final puff of
  breath: the Princess began to quiver, and then arose alive and
  well! The King came in person to the door of their room, and
  cried:

  "In the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
  Ghost!"

  "Amen!" they replied.

  "Have you cured the Princess?" asked the King.

  "We've cured her," say the doctors. "Here she is!"

  Out went the Princess to the King, alive and well.

  Says the King to the doctors: "What sort of valuables will
  you have? would you like gold or silver? Take whatever you
  please."

  Well, they began taking gold and silver. The old man used
  only a thumb and two fingers, but the Pope seized whole handfuls,
  and kept on stowing them away in his wallet--shovelling
  them into it, and then lifting it a bit to see if he was strong
  enough to carry it.

  At last they took their leave of the King and went their way.
  The old man said to the Pope, "We'll bury this money in the
  ground, and go and make another cure." Well, they walked
  and walked, and at length they reached another country. In
  that country, also, the King had a daughter at the point of death,
  and he had given notice that whoever cured his daughter should
  have half of his kingdom and of his goods and possessions; but
  if he failed to cure her he should have his head chopped off and
  hung up on a stake.[457] Then the Evil One afflicted the envious
  Pope, suggesting to him "Why shouldn't he go and perform
  the cure by himself, without saying a word to the old man, and
  so lay hold of all the gold and silver for himself?" So the
  Pope walked about in front of the royal gates, forced himself on
  the notice of the people there, and gave out that he was a doctor.
  In the same way as before he asked the King for a private
  room, a tub of water, a large table, and a sharp sword. Shutting
  himself up in the private room, he laid the Princess on the table,
  and began chopping her up with the sharp sword; and however
  much the Princess might scream or squeal, the Pope, without
  paying any attention to either screaming or squealing, went on
  chopping and chopping just as if she had been so much beef.
  And when he had chopped her up into little pieces, he threw
  them into the tub, washed them, rinsed them, and then put
  them together bit by bit, exactly as the old man had done, expecting
  to see all the pieces unite with each other. He breathes
  on them--but nothing happens! He gives another puff--worse
  than ever! See, the Pope flings the pieces back again into the
  water, washes and washes, rinses and rinses, and again puts
  them together bit by bit. Again he breathes on them--but still
  nothing comes of it.

  "Woe is me," thinks the Pope; "here's a mess!"

  Next morning the King arrives and looks--the doctor has
  had no success at all--he's only messed the dead body all over
  with muck!

  The King ordered the doctor off to the gallows. Then our
  Pope besought him, crying--

  "O King! O free to do thy will! Spare me for a little
  time! I will run for the old man, he will cure the Princess."

  The Pope ran off in search of the old man. He found the
  old man, and cried:

  "Old man! I am guilty, wretch that I am! The Devil
  got hold of me. I wanted to cure the King's daughter all by
  myself, but I couldn't. Now they're going to hang me. Do
  help me!"

  The old man returned with the Pope.

  The Pope was taken to the gallows. Says the old man to
  the Pope:

  "Pope! who ate my loaves?"

  "Not I, on my word! So help me Heaven, not I!"

  The Pope was hoisted on to the second step. Says the old
  man to the Pope:

  "Pope! who ate my loaves?"

  "Not I, on my word! So help me Heaven, not I!"

  He mounted the third step--and again it was "Not I!"
  And now his head was actually in the noose--but it's "Not I!"
  all the same. Well, there was nothing to be done! Says the
  old man to the King:

  "O King! O free to do thy will! Permit me to cure the
  Princess. And if I do not cure her, order another noose to be
  got ready. A noose for me, and a noose for the Pope!"

  Well, the old man put the pieces of the Princess's body together,
  bit by bit, and breathed on them--and the Princess stood
  up alive and well. The King recompensed them both with
  silver and gold.

  "Let's go and divide the money, Pope," said the old man.

  So they went. They divided the money into three heaps.
  The Pope looked at them, and said:

  "How's this? There's only two of us. For whom is this
  third share?"

  "That," says the old man, "is for him who ate my loaves."

  "I ate them, old man," cries the Pope; "I did really, so
  help me Heaven!"

  "Then the money is yours," says the old man. "Take my
  share too. And now go and serve in your parish faithfully;
  don't be greedy, and don't go hitting Nicholas over the shoulders
  with the keys."

  Thus spake the old man, and straightway disappeared.

      [The principal motive of this story is, of course, the
      same as that of "The Smith and the Demon," in No. 13
      (see above, p. 70). A miraculous cure is effected by a
      supernatural being. A man attempts to do likewise, but
      fails. When about to undergo the penalty of his
      failure, he is saved by that being, who reads him a
      moral lesson. In the original form of the tale the
      supernatural agent was probably a demigod, whom a
      vague Christian influence has in one instance degraded
      into the Devil, in another, canonized as St. Nicholas.

      The Medea's cauldron episode occurs in very many
      folk-tales, such as the German "Bruder Lustig" (Grimm,
      No. 81) and "Das junge geglühte Männlein" (Grimm, No.
      147), in the latter of which our Lord, accompanied by
      St. Peter, spends a night in a Smith's house, and
      makes an old beggar-man young by first placing him in
      the fire, and then plunging him into water. After the
      departure of his visitors, the Smith tries a similar
      experiment on his mother-in-law, but quite
      unsuccessfully. In the corresponding Norse tale of
      "The Master-Smith," (Asbjörnsen and Moe, No. 21,
      Dasent, No. 16) an old beggar-woman is the victim of
      the Smith's unsuccessful experiment. In another Norse
      tale, that of "Peik" (Asbjörnsen's New Series, No.
      101, p. 219) a king is induced to kill his wife and
      his daughter in the mistaken belief that he will be
      able to restore them to life. In one of the stories of
      the "Dasakumáracharita," a king is persuaded to jump
      into a certain lake in the hope of obtaining a new and
      improved body. He is then killed by his insidious
      adviser, who usurps his throne, pretending to be the
      renovated monarch. In another story in the same
      collection a king believes that his wife will be able
      to confer on him by her magic skill "a most celestial
      figure," and under that impression confides to her all
      his secrets, after which she brings about his death.
      See Wilson's "Essays," ii. 217, &c., and 262, &c.
      Jacob's "Hindoo Tales," pp. 180, 315.]


II.

_About Demons._

From the stories which have already been quoted some idea may be
gained of the part which evil spirits play in Russian popular fiction.
In one of them (No. 1) figures the ghoul which feeds on the dead, in
several (Nos. 37, 38, 45-48) we see the fiend-haunted corpse hungering
after human flesh and blood; the history of _The Bad Wife_ (No. 7)
proves how a demon may suffer at a woman's hands, that of _The Dead
Witch_ (No. 3) shows to what indignities the remains of a wicked woman
may be subjected by the fiends with whom she has chosen to associate.
In the _Awful Drunkard_ (No. 6), and the _Fiddler in Hell_ (No. 41),
the abode of evil spirits is portrayed, and some light is thrown on
their manners and customs; and in the _Smith and the Demon_ (No. 13),
the portrait of one of their number is drawn in no unkindly spirit.
The difference which exists between the sketches of fiends contained
in these stories is clearly marked, so much so that it would of itself
be sufficient to prove that there is no slight confusion of ideas in
the minds of the Russian peasants with regard to the demoniacal beings
whom they generally call _chorti_ or devils. Still more clearly is the
contrast between those ideas brought out by the other stories, many in
number, into which those powers of darkness enter. It is evident that
the traditions from which the popular conception of the ghostly enemy
has been evolved must have been of a complex and even conflicting
character.

Of very heterogeneous elements must have been composed the form under
which the popular fancy, in Russia as well as in other lands, has
embodied the abstract idea of evil. The diabolical characters in the
Russian tales and legends are constantly changing the proportions of
their figures, the nature of their attributes. In one story they seem
to belong to the great and widely subdivided family of Indian demons;
in another they appear to be akin to certain fiends of Turanian
extraction; in a third they display features which may have been
inherited from the forgotten deities of old Slavonic mythology; in all
the stories which belong to the "legendary class" they bear manifest
signs of having been subjected to Christian influences, the effect of
which has been insufficient to do more than slightly to disguise their
heathenism.

The old gods of the Slavonians have passed away and left behind but
scanty traces of their existence; but still, in the traditions and
proverbial expressions of the peasants in various Slavonic lands,
there may be recognized some relics of the older faith. Among these
are a few referring to a White and to a Black God. Thus, among the
peasants of White Russia some vague memory still exists of a white or
bright being, now called Byelun,[458] who leads belated travellers out
of forests, and bestows gold on men who do him good service. "Dark is
it in the forest without Byelun" is one phrase; and another, spoken of
a man on whom fortune has smiled, is, "He must have made friends with
Byelun." On the other hand the memory of the black or evil god is
preserved in such imprecations as the Ukraine "May the black god smite
thee!"[459] To ancient pagan traditions, also, into which a Christian
element has entered, may be assigned the popular belief that infants
which have been cursed by their mothers before their birth, or which
are suffocated during their sleep, or which die from any causes
unchristened or christened by a drunken priest, become the prey of
demons. This idea has given rise in Russia, as well as elsewhere, to a
large group of stories. The Russian peasants believe, it is said, that
in order to rescue from the fiends the soul of a babe which has been
suffocated in its sleep, its mother must spend three nights in a
church, standing within a circle traced by the hand of a priest. When
the cocks crow on the third morning, the demons will give her back her
dead child.[460]

Great stress is laid in the skazkas and legends upon the terrible
power of a parent's curse. The "hasty word" of a father or a mother
will condemn even an innocent child to slavery among devils, and when
it has once been uttered, it is irrevocable. It might have been
supposed that the fearful efficacy of such an imprecation would have
silenced bad language, as that of the _Vril_ rendered war impossible
among the Vril-ya of "The Coming Race;" but that such was not the case
is proved by the number of narratives which turn on uncalled-for
parental cursing. Here is an abridgment of one of these stories.

There was an old man who lived near Lake Onega, and who supported
himself and his wife by hunting. One day when he was engaged in the
pursuit of game, a well-dressed man met him and said,

"Sell me that dog of yours, and come for your money to the Mian
mountain to-morrow evening."

The old man sold him the dog, and went next day to the top of the
mountain, where he found a great city inhabited by devils.[461] There
he soon found the house of his debtor, who provided him with a banquet
and a bath. And in the bath-room he was served by a young man who,
when the bath was over, fell at his feet, saying,

"Don't accept money for your dog, grandfather, but ask for me!"

The old man consented. "Give me that good youth," said he. "He shall
serve instead of a son to me."

There was no help for it; they had to give him the youth. And when the
old man had returned home, the youth told him to go to Novgorod, there
to enquire for a merchant, and ask him whether he had any children.

He did so, and the merchant replied,

"I had an only son, but his mother cursed him in a passion, crying,
'The devil take thee!'[462] And so the devil carried him off."

It turned out that the youth whom the old man had saved from the
devils was that merchant's son. Thereupon the merchant rejoiced
greatly, and took the old man and his wife to live with him in his
house.[463]

And here is another tale of the same kind, from the Vladimir
Government.

Once upon a time there was an old couple, and they had an only son.
His mother had cursed him before he was born, but he grew up and
married. Soon afterwards he suddenly disappeared. His parents did all
they could to trace him, but their attempts were in vain.

Now there was a hut in the forest not far off, and thither it chanced
that an old beggar came one night, and lay down to rest on the stove.
Before he had been there long, some one rode up to the door of the
hut, got off his horse, entered the hut, and remained there all night,
muttering incessantly:

"May the Lord judge my mother, in that she cursed me while a babe
unborn!"

Next morning the beggar went to the house of the old couple, and told
them all that had occurred. So towards evening the old man went to the
hut in the forest, and hid himself behind the stove. Presently the
horseman arrived, entered the hut, and began to repeat the words which
the beggar had overheard. The old man recognized his son, and came
forth to greet him, crying:

"O my dear son! at last I have found thee! never again will I let thee
go!"

"Follow me!" replied his son, who mounted his horse and rode away, his
father following him on foot. Presently they came to a river which was
frozen over, and in the ice was a hole.[464] And the youth rode
straight into that hole, and in it both he and his horse disappeared.
The old man lingered long beside the ice-hole, then he returned home
and said to his wife:

"I have found our son, but it will be hard to get him back. Why, he
lives in the water!"

Next night the youth's mother went to the hut, but she succeeded no
better than her husband had done.

So on the third night his young wife went to the hut and hid behind
the stove. And when she heard the horseman enter she sprang forth,
exclaiming:

"My darling dear, my life-long spouse! now will I never part from
thee!"

"Follow me!" replied her husband.

And when they came to the edge of the ice-hole--

"If thou goest into the water, then will I follow after thee!" cried
she.

"If so, take off thy cross," he replied.

She took off her cross, leaped into the ice-hole--and found herself in
a vast hall. In it Satan[465] was seated. And when he saw her arrive,
he asked her husband whom he had brought with him.

"This is my wife," replied the youth.

"Well then, if she is thy wife, get thee gone hence with her! married
folks must not be sundered."[466]

So the wife rescued her husband, and brought him back from the devils
into the free light.[467]

Sometimes it is a victim's own imprudence, and not a parent's "hasty
word," which has placed him in the power of the Evil One. There is a
well-known story, which has spread far and wide over Europe, of a
soldier who abstains for a term of years from washing, shaving, and
hair-combing, and who serves, or at least obeys, the devil during that
time, at the end of which he is rewarded by the fiend with great
wealth. His appearance being against him, he has some difficulty in
finding a wife, rich as he is. But after the elder sisters of a family
have refused him, the youngest accepts him; whereupon he allows
himself to be cleansed, combed, and dressed in bright apparel, and
leads a cleanly and a happy life ever afterwards.[468]

In one of the German versions of this story, a king's elder daughter,
when asked to marry her rich but slovenly suitor, replies, "I would
sooner go into the deepest water than do that." In a Russian
version,[469] the unwashed soldier lends a large sum of money to an
impoverished monarch, who cannot pay his troops, and asks his royal
creditor to give him one of his daughters in marriage by way of
recompense. The king reflects. He is sorry for his daughters, but at
the same time he cannot do without the money. At last, he tells the
soldier to get his portrait painted, and promises to show it to the
princesses, and see if one of them will accept him. The soldier has
his likeness taken, "touch for touch, just exactly as he is," and the
king shows it to his daughters. The eldest princess sees that "the
picture is that of a monster, with dishevelled hair, and uncut nails,
and unwiped nose," and cries:

"I won't have him! I'd sooner have the devil!"

Now the devil "was standing behind her, pen and paper in hand. He
heard what she said, and booked her soul."

When the second princess is asked whether she will marry the soldier,
she exclaims:

"No indeed! I'd rather die an old maid, I'd sooner be linked with the
devil, than marry that man!"

When the devil heard that, "he booked her soul too."

But the youngest princess, the Cordelia of the family, when she is
asked whether she will marry the man who has helped her father in his
need, replies:

"It's fated I must, it seems! I'll marry him, and then--God's will be
done!"

While the preparations are being made for the marriage, the soldier
arrives at the end of his term of service to "the little devil" who
had hired him, and from whom he had received his wealth in return for
his abstinence and cleanliness. So he calls the "little devil," and
says, "Now turn me into a nice young man."

Accordingly "the little devil cut him up into small pieces, threw them
into a cauldron and set them on to boil. When they were done enough,
he took them out and put them together again properly--bone to bone,
joint to joint, vein to vein. Then he sprinkled them with the Waters
of Life and Death--and up jumped the soldier, a finer lad than stories
can describe, or pens portray!"

The story does not end here. When the "little devil" returns to the
lake from which he came, "the grandfather" of the demons asks him--

"How about the soldier?"

"He has served his time honestly and honorably," is the reply. "Never
once did he shave, have his hair cut, wipe his nose, or change his
clothes." The "grandfather" flies into a passion.

"What! in fifteen whole years you couldn't entrap a soldier! What, all
that money wasted for nothing! What sort of a devil do you call
yourself after that?"--and ordered him to be flung "into boiling
pitch."

"Stop, grandfather!" replies his grandchild. "I've booked two souls
instead of the soldier's one."

"How's that?"

"Why, this way. The soldier wanted to marry one of three princesses,
but the elder one and the second one told their father that they'd
sooner marry the devil than the soldier. So you see both of them are
ours."

After he had heard this explanation, "the grandfather acknowledged
that the little devil was in the right, and ordered him to be set
free. The imp, you see, understood his business."

      [For two German versions of this story, see the tales
      of "Des Teufels russiger Bruder," and "Der
      Bärenhäuter" (Grimm, Nos. 100, 101, and Bd. iii. pp.
      181, 182). More than twelve centuries ago,
      Hiouen-Thsang transferred the following story from
      India to China. A certain Rishi passed many times ten
      thousand years in a religious ecstasy. His body became
      like a withered tree. At last he emerged from his
      ecstasy, and felt inclined to marry, so he went to a
      neighboring palace, and asked the king to bestow upon
      him one of his daughters. The king, exceedingly
      embarrassed, called the princesses together, and asked
      which of them would consent to accept the dreaded
      suitor (who, of course, had not paid the slightest
      attention to his toilette for hundreds of centuries).
      Ninety-nine of those ladies flatly refused to have
      anything to do with him, but the hundredth, the last
      and youngest of the party, agreed to sacrifice herself
      for her father's sake. But when the Rishi saw his
      bride he was discontented, and when he heard that her
      elder and fairer sisters had all refused him, he
      pronounced a curse which made all ninety-nine of them
      humpbacks, and so destroyed their chance of marrying
      at all. Stanislas Julien's "Mémoires sur les contrées
      occidentales," 1857, i. pp. 244-7.]

As the idea that "a hasty word" can place its utterer or its victim
in the power of the Evil One (not only after death, but also during
this life) has given rise to numerous Russian legends, and as it still
exists, to some extent, as a living faith in the minds of the Russian
peasantry, it may be as well to quote at length one of the stories in
which it is embodied. It will be recognized as a variant of the
stories about the youth who visits the "Water King" and elopes with
one of that monarch's daughters. The main difference between the
"legend" we are about to quote, and the skazkas which have already
been quoted, is that a devil of the Satanic type is substituted in it
for the mythical personage--whether Slavonic Neptune or Indian
Rákshasa--who played a similar part in them.


  THE HASTY WORD.[470]

  In a certain village there lived an old couple in great poverty,
  and they had one son. The son grew up,[471] and the old woman
  began to say to the old man:

  "It's time for us to get our son married."

  "Well then, go and ask for a wife for him," said he.

  So she went to a neighbor to ask for his daughter for her
  son: the neighbor refused. She went to a second peasant's,
  but the second refused too--to a third, but he showed her the
  door. She went round the whole village; not a soul would
  grant her request. So she returned home and cried--

  "Well, old man! our lad's an unlucky fellow!"

  "How so?"

  "I've trudged round to every house, but no one will give
  him his daughter."

  "That's a bad business!" says the old man; "the summer
  will soon be coming, but we have no one to work for us here.
  Go to another village, old woman, perhaps you will get a bride
  for him there."

  The old woman went to another village, visited every house
  from one end to the other, but there wasn't an atom of good to
  be got out of it. Wherever she thrusts herself, they always
  refuse. With what she left home, with that she returned
  home.

  "No," she says, "no one wants to become related to us
  poor beggars."

  "If that's the case," answers the old man, "there's no use
  in wearing out your legs. Jump up on to the _polati_."[472]

  The son was sorely afflicted, and began to entreat his parents,
  saying:

  "My born father and my born mother! give me your blessing.
  I will go and seek my fate myself."

  "But where will you go?"

  "Where my eyes lead me."

  So they gave him their blessing, and let him go whithersoever
  it pleased him.[473]

  Well, the youth went out upon the highway, began to weep
  very bitterly, and said to himself as he walked:

  "Was I born into the world worse than all other men, that
  not a single girl is willing to marry me? Methinks if the devil
  himself would give me a bride, I'd take even her!"

  Suddenly, as if rising from the earth, there appeared before
  him a very old man.

  "Good-day, good youth!"

  "Good-day, old man!"

  "What was that you were saying just now?"

  The youth was frightened and did not know what reply to
  make.

  "Don't be afraid of me! I sha'n't do you any harm, and
  moreover, perhaps I may get you out of your trouble. Speak
  boldly!"

  The youth told him everything precisely.

  "Poor creature that I am! There isn't a single girl who
  will marry me. Well, as I went along I became exceedingly
  wretched, and in my misery I said: 'If the devil offered me a
  bride, I'd take even her!'"

  The old man laughed and said:

  "Follow me, I'll let you choose a lovely bride for yourself."

  By-and-by they reached a lake.

  "Turn your back to the lake and walk backwards," said the
  old man. Scarcely had the youth had time to turn round and
  take a couple of steps, when he found himself under the water
  and in a white-stone palace--all its rooms splendidly furnished,
  cunningly decorated. The old man gave him to eat and to
  drink. Afterwards he introduced twelve maidens, each one
  more beautiful than the other.

  "Choose whichever you like! whichever you choose, her
  will I bestow upon you."

  "That's a puzzling job!" said the youth; "give me till to-morrow
  morning to think about it, grandfather!"

  "Well, think away!" said the old man, and led his guest to
  a private chamber. The youth lay down to sleep and thought:

  "Which one shall I choose?"

  Suddenly the door opened; a beautiful maiden entered.

  "Are you asleep, or not, good youth?" says she.

  "No, fair maiden! I can't get to sleep, for I'm always thinking
  which bride to choose."

  "That's the very reason I have come to give you counsel.
  You see, good youth, you've managed to become the devil's
  guest. Now listen. If you want to go on living in the white
  world, then do what I tell you. But if you don't follow my
  instructions, you'll never get out of here alive!"

  "Tell me what to do, fair maiden. I won't forget it all
  my life."

  "To-morrow the fiend will bring you twelve maidens, each one
  exactly like the others. But you take a good look and choose
  me. A fly will be sitting above my right eye--that will be a
  certain guide for you." And then the fair maiden proceeded to
  tell him about herself, who she was.

  "Do you know the priest of such and such a village?" she
  says. "I'm his daughter, the one who disappeared from home
  when nine years old. One day my father was angry with me,
  and in his wrath he said, 'May devils fly away with you!' I
  went out on the steps and began to cry. All of a sudden the
  fiends seized me and brought me here; and here I am living
  with them!"

  Next morning the old man brought in the twelve fair
  maidens--one just like another--and ordered the youth to
  choose his bride. He looked at them and took her above whose
  right eye sat a fly. The old man was loth to give her up, so he
  shifted the maidens about, and told him to make a fresh choice.
  The youth pointed out the same one as before. The fiend
  obliged him to choose yet a third time. He again guessed
  his bride aright.

  "Well, you're in luck! take her home with you," said the
  fiend.

  Immediately the youth and the fair maiden found themselves
  on the shore of the lake, and until they reached the high road
  they kept on walking backwards. Presently the devils came
  rushing after them in hot pursuit:

  "Let us recover our maiden!" they cry.

  They look: there are no footsteps going away from the
  lake; all the footsteps lead into the water! They ran to and
  fro, they searched everywhere, but they had to go back empty
  handed.

  Well, the good youth brought his bride to her village, and
  stopped opposite the priest's house. The priest saw him and
  sent out his laborer, saying:

  "Go and ask who those people are."

  "We? we're travellers; please let us spend the night in
  your house," they replied.

  "I have merchants paying me a visit," says the priest,
  "and even without them there's but little room in the house."

  "What are you thinking of, father?" says one of the
  merchants. "It's always one's duty to accommodate a traveller,
  they won't interfere with us."

  "Very well, let them come in."

  So they came in, exchanged greetings, and sat down on a
  bench in the back corner.

  "Don't you know me, father?" presently asks the fair
  maiden. "Of a surety I am your own daughter."

  Then she told him everything that had happened. They
  began to kiss and embrace each other, to pour forth tears of
  joy.

  "And who is this man?" says the priest.

  "That is my betrothed. He brought me back into the white
  world; if it hadn't been for him I should have remained down
  there for ever!"

  After this the fair maiden untied her bundle, and in it were
  gold and silver dishes: she had carried them off from the devils.
  The merchant looked at them and said:

  "Ah! those are my dishes. One day I was feasting with my
  guests, and when I got drunk I became angry with my wife. 'To
  the devil with you!' I exclaimed, and began flinging from the
  table, and beyond the threshold, whatever I could lay my hands
  upon. At that moment my dishes disappeared!"

  And in reality so had it happened. When the merchant
  mentioned the devil's name, the fiend immediately appeared at
  the threshold, began seizing the gold and silver wares, and
  flinging in their place bits of pottery.

  Well, by this accident the youth got himself a capital bride.
  And after he had married her he went back to his parents.
  They had long ago counted him as lost to them for ever.
  And indeed it was no subject for jesting; he had been away
  from home three whole years, and yet it seemed to him that
  he had not in all spent more than twenty-four hours with the
  devils.

      [A quaint version of the legend on which this story is
      founded is given by Gervase of Tilbury in his "Otia
      Imperialia," whence the story passed into the "Gesta
      Romanorum" (cap. clxii.) and spread widely over
      mediæval Europe. A certain Catalonian was so much
      annoyed one day "by the continued and inappeasable
      crying of his little daughter, that he commended her
      to the demons." Whereupon she was immediately carried
      off. Seven years after this, he learnt (from a man
      placed by a similar imprecation in the power of the
      demons, who used him as a vehicle) that his daughter
      was in the interior of a neighboring mountain, and
      might be recovered if he would demand her. So he
      ascended to the summit of the mountain, and there
      claimed his child. She straightway appeared in
      miserable plight, "arida, tetra, oculis vagis, ossibus
      et nervis et pellibus vix hærentibus," etc. By the
      judicious care, however, of her now cautious parent
      she was restored to physical and moral respectability.
      For some valuable observations on this story see
      Liebrecht's edition of the "Otia Imperialia," pp.
      137-9. In the German story of "Die sieben Raben"
      (Grimm, No. 25) a father's "hasty word" turns his six
      sons into ravens.]

When devils are introduced into a story of this class, it always
assumes a grotesque, if not an absolutely comic air. The evil spirits
are almost always duped and defeated, and that result is generally due
to their remarkable want of intelligence. For they display in their
dealings with their human antagonists a deficiency of intellectual
power which almost amounts to imbecility. The explanation of this
appears to be that the devils of European folk-lore have nothing in
common with the rebellious angels of Miltonic theology beyond their
vague denomination; nor can any but a nominal resemblance be traced
between their chiefs or "grandfathers" and the thunder-smitten but
still majestic "Lucifer, Son of the Morning." The demon rabble of
"Popular Tales" are merely the lubber fiends of heathen mythology,
beings endowed with supernatural might, but scantily provided with
mental power; all of terrific manual clutch, but of weak intellectual
grasp. And so the hardy mortal who measures his powers against theirs,
even in those cases in which his strength has not been intensified by
miraculous agencies, easily overcomes or deludes the slow-witted
monsters with whom he strives--whether his antagonist be a Celtic or
Teutonic Giant, or a French Ogre, or a Norse Troll, or a Greek Drakos
or Lamia, or a Lithuanian Laume, or a Russian Snake or Koshchei or
Baba Yaga, or an Indian Rákshasa or Pisácha, or any other member of
the many species of fiends for which, in Christian parlance, the
generic name is that of "devils."

There is no great richness of invention manifested in the stories
which deal with the outwitting of evil spirits. The same devices are
in almost all cases resorted to, and their effect is invariable. The
leading characters undergo certain transmutations as the scene of the
story is shifted, but their mutual relations remain constant. Thus, in
a German story[474] we find a schoolmaster deceiving the devil; in one
of its Slavonic counterparts[475] a gypsy deludes a snake; in another,
current among the Baltic Kashoubes, in place of the snake figures a
giant so huge that the thumb of his glove serves as a shelter for the
hero of the tale--one which is closely connected with that which tells
of Thor and the giant Skrymir.

The Russian stories in which devils are tricked by mortals closely
resemble, for the most part, those which are current in so many parts
of Europe. The hero of the tale squeezes whey out of a piece of cheese
or curd which he passes off as a stone; he induces the fleet demon to
compete with his "Hop o' my Thumb" the hare; he sets the strong demon
to wrestle with his "greybeard" the bear; he frightens the
"grandfather" of the fiends by proposing to fling that potentate's
magic staff so high in the air that it will never come down; and he
persuades his diabolical opponents to keep pouring gold into a
perforated hat or sack. Sometimes, however, a less familiar incident
occurs. Thus in a story from the Tambof Government, Zachary the
Unlucky is sent by the tailor, his master, to fetch a fiddle from a
wolf-fiend. The demon agrees to let him have it on condition that he
spends three years in continually weaving nets without ever going to
sleep. Zachary sets to work, but at the end of a month he grows
drowsy. The wolf asks if he is asleep. "No, I'm not asleep," he
replies; "but I'm thinking which fish there are most of in the
river--big ones or little ones." The wolf offers to go and enquire,
and spends three or four months in solving the problem. Meanwhile
Zachary sleeps, taking care, however, to be up and at work when the
wolf returns to say that the big fishes are in the majority.

Time passes, and again Zachary begins to nod. The wolf enquires if he
has gone to sleep, but is told that he is awake, but engrossed by the
question as to "which folks are there most of in the world--the living
or the dead." The wolf goes out to count them, and Zachary sleeps in
comfort, till just before it comes back to say that the living are
more numerous than the dead. By the time the wolf-fiend has made a
third journey in order to settle a doubt which Zachary describes as
weighing on his mind--as to the numerical relation of the large beasts
to the small--the three years have passed away. So the wolf-fiend is
obliged to part with his fiddle, and Zachary carries it back to the
tailor in triumph.[476]

The demons not unfrequently show themselves capable of being actuated
by gratitude. Thus, as we have already seen, the story of the Awful
Drunkard[477] represents the devil himself as being grateful to a man
who has rebuked an irascible old woman for unjustly blaming the Prince
of Darkness. In a skazka from the Orenburg Government, a lad named
Vanka [Jack] is set to watch his father's turnip-field by night.
Presently comes a boy who fills two huge sacks with turnips, and
vainly tries to carry them off. While he is tugging away at them he
catches sight of Vanka, and immediately asks him to help him home with
his load. Vanka consents, and carries the turnips to a cottage,
wherein is seated "an old greybeard with horns on his head," who
receives him kindly and offers him a quantity of gold as a recompense
for his trouble. But, acting on the instructions he has received from
the boy, Vanka will take nothing but the greybeard's lute, the sounds
of which exercise a magic power over all living creatures.[478]

One of the most interesting of the stories of this class is that of
the man who unwittingly blesses the devil. As a specimen of its
numerous variants we may take the opening of a skazka respecting the
origin of brandy.

"There was a moujik who had a wife and seven children, and one day he
got ready to go afield, to plough. When his horse was harnessed, and
everything ready, he ran indoors to get some bread; but when he got
there, and looked in the cupboard, there was nothing there but a
single crust. This he carried off bodily and drove away.

"He reached his field and began ploughing. When he had ploughed up
half of it, he unharnessed his horse and turned it out to graze. After
that he was just going to eat the bread, when he said to himself,

"'Why didn't I leave this crust for my children?'

"So after thinking about it for awhile, he set it aside.

"Presently a little demon came sidling up and carried off the bread.
The moujik returned and looked about everywhere, but no bread was to
be seen. However, all he said was, 'God be with him who took it!'

"The little demon[479] ran off to the devil,[480] and cried:

"'Grandfather! I've stolen Uncle Sidor's[481] bread!'

"'Well, what did he say?'

"'He said, "God be with him!"'

"'Be off with you!' says the devil. 'Hire yourself to him for three
years.'

"So the little demon ran back to the moujik."

The rest of the story tells how the imp taught Isidore to make
corn-brandy, and worked for him a long time faithfully. But at last
one day Isidore drank so much brandy that he fell into a drunken
sleep. From this he was roused by the imp, whereupon he exclaimed in a
rage, "Go to the Devil!" and straightway the "little demon"
disappeared.[482]

In another version of the story,[483] when the peasant finds that his
crust has disappeared, he exclaims--

"Here's a wonder! I've seen nobody, and yet somebody has carried off
my crust! Well, here's good luck to him![484] I daresay I shall starve
to death."

When Satan heard what had taken place, he ordered that the peasant's
crust should be restored. So the demon who had stolen it "turned
himself into a good youth," and became the peasant's hireling. When a
drought was impending, he scattered the peasant's seed-corn over a
swamp; when a wet season was at hand, he sowed the slopes of the
hills. In each instance his forethought enabled his master to fill his
barns while the other peasants lost their crops.

      [A Moravian version of this tale will be found in "Der
      schwarze Knirps" (Wenzig, No. 15, p. 67). In another
      Moravian story in the same collection (No. 8) entitled
      "Der böse Geist im Dienste," an evil spirit steals the
      food which a man had left outside his house for poor
      passers by. When the demon returns to hell he finds
      its gates closed, and he is informed by "the oldest of
      the devils," that he must expiate his crime by a three
      years' service on earth.

      A striking parallel to the Russian and the former of
      the Moravian stories is offered by "a legend of
      serpent worship," from Bhaunagar in Káthiáwád. A
      certain king had seven wives, one of whom was badly
      treated. Feeling hungry one day, she scraped out of
      the pots which had been given her to wash some remains
      of rice boiled in milk, set the food on one side, and
      then went to bathe. During her absence a female Nága
      (or supernatural snake-being) ate up the rice, and
      then "entering her hole, sat there, resolved to bite
      the woman if she should curse her, but not otherwise."
      When the woman returned, and found her meal had been
      stolen, she did not lose her temper, but only said,
      "May the stomach of the eater be cooled!" When the
      Nága heard this, she emerged from her hole and said,
      "Well done! I now regard you as my daughter," etc.
      (From the "Indian Antiquary," Bombay, No. 1, 1872, pp.
      6, 7.)]

Sometimes the demon of the _legenda_ bears a close resemblance to the
snake of the _skazka_. Thus, an evil spirit is described as coming
every night at twelve o'clock to the chamber of a certain princess,
and giving her no rest till the dawn of day. A soldier--the fairy
prince in a lower form--comes to her rescue, and awaits the arrival of
the fiend in her room, which he has had brilliantly lighted. Exactly
at midnight up flies the evil spirit, assumes the form of a man, and
tries to enter the room. But he is stopped by the soldier, who
persuades him to play cards with him for fillips, tricks him in
various ways, and fillips him to such effect with a species of
"three-man beetle," that the demon beats a hasty retreat.

The next night Satan sends another devil to the palace. The result is
the same as before, and the process is repeated every night for a
whole month. At the end of that time "Grandfather Satan" himself
confronts the soldier, but he receives so tremendous a beating that he
flies back howling "to his swamp." After a time, the soldier induces
the whole of the fiendish party to enter his knapsack, prevents them
from getting out again by signing it with a cross, and then has it
thumped on an anvil to his heart's content. Afterwards he carries it
about on his back, the fiends remaining under it all the while. But at
last some women open it, during his absence from a cottage in which he
has left it, and out rush the fiends with a crash and a roar. Meeting
the soldier on his way back to the cottage, they are so frightened
that they fling themselves into the pool below a mill-wheel; and
there, the story declares, they still remain.[485]

This "legend" is evidently nothing more than an adaptation of one of
the tales about the dull demons of olden times, whom the Christian
story-teller has transformed into Satan and his subject fiends.

By way of a conclusion to this chapter--which might be expanded
indefinitely, so numerous are the stories of the class of which it
treats--we will take the moral tale of "The Gossip's Bedstead."[486] A
certain peasant, it relates, was so poor that, in order to save
himself from starvation, he took to sorcery. After a time he became an
adept in the black art, and contracted an intimate acquaintance with
the fiendish races. When his son had reached man's estate, the peasant
saw it was necessary to find him a bride, so he set out to seek one
among "his friends the devils." On arriving in their realm he soon
found what he wanted, in the person of a girl who had drunk herself to
death, and who, in common with other women who had died of drink, was
employed by the devils as a water carrier. Her employers at once
agreed to give her in marriage to the son of their friend, and a
wedding feast was instantly prepared. While the consequent revelry was
in progress, Satan offered to present to the bridegroom a receipt
which a father had given to the devils when he sold them his son. But
when the receipt was sought for--the production of which would have
enabled the bridegroom to claim the youth in question as his slave--it
could not be found; a certain devil had carried it off, and refused to
say where he had hidden it. In vain did his master cause him to be
beaten with iron clubs, he remained obstinately mute. At length Satan
exclaimed--

"Stretch him on the Gossip's Bedstead!"

As soon as the refractory devil heard these words, he was so
frightened that he surrendered the receipt, which was handed over to
the visitor. Astonished at the result, the peasant enquired what sort
of bedstead that was which had been mentioned with so much effect.

"Well, I'll tell you, but don't you tell anyone else," replied Satan,
after hesitating for a time. "That bedstead is made for us devils, and
for our relations, connexions, and gossips. It is all on fire, and it
runs on wheels, and turns round and round."

When the peasant heard this, fear came upon him, and he jumped up from
his seat and fled away as fast as he could.

       *       *       *       *       *

At this point, though much still remains to be said, I will for the
present bring my remarks to a close. Incomplete as is the account I
have given of the Skazkas, it may yet, I trust, be of use to students
who wish to compare as many types as possible of the Popular Tale. I
shall be glad if it proves of service to them. I shall be still more
glad if I succeed in interesting the general reader in the tales of
the Russian People, and through them, in the lives of those Russian
men and women of low degree who are wont to tell them, those Russian
children who love to hear them.