CHAPTER I.

     The Origin, Prevalence, and Variety of Superstition--The
     Belief in Witchcraft the most horrid Form of
     Superstition--Most flourishing in the Sixteenth and
     Seventeenth Centuries--The Sentiments of Addison,
     Blackstone, and the Lawyers of the Eighteenth Century upon
     the Subject--Chaldean and Persian Magic--Jewish
     Witchcraft--Its important Influence on Christian and Modern
     Belief--Greek Pharmacy and Sorcery--Early Roman Laws against
     Conjuration and Magic Charms--Crimes perpetrated, under the
     Empire, in connection with Sorceric Practices--The general
     Persecution for Magic under Valentinian and Valens--German
     and Scandinavian Sag√¶--The probable Origin of the general
     Belief in an Evil Principle.


Superstition, the product of ignorance of causes, of the
proneness to seek the solution of phenomena out of and beyond
nature, and of the consequent natural but unreasoning dread of
the Unknown and Invisible (ignorantly termed the supernatural),
is at once universal in the extent, and various in the kinds,
of its despotism. Experience and reason seem to prove that,
inherent to and apparently coexistent with the human mind, it
naturally originates in the constitution of humanity: in ignorance
and uncertainty, in an instinctive doubt and fear of the
_Unknown_. Accident may moderate its power among particular peoples
and persons; and there are always exceptional minds whose
natural temper and exercise of reason are able to free them from
the servitude of a delusive imagination. For the mass of mankind,
the germ of superstition, prepared to assume always a new shape
and sometimes fresh vigour, is indestructible. The severest
assaults are ineffectual to eradicate it: hydra-like, far from
being destroyed by a seeming mortal stroke, it often raises its
many-headed form with redoubled force.

It will appear more philosophic to deplore the imperfection, than
to deride the folly of human nature, when the fact that the
superstitious sentiment is not only a result of mere barbarism or
vulgar ignorance, to be expelled of course by civilisation and
knowledge, but is indigenous in the life of every man, barbarous
or civilised, pagan or Christian, is fully recognised. The
enlightening influence of science, as far as it extends, is
irresistible; and its progress within certain limits seems sure
and almost omnipotent. But it is unfortunately limited in the
extent of its influence, as well as uncertain in duration; while
reason enjoys a feeble reign compared with ignorance and
imagination.[1] If it is the great office of history to teach by
experience, it is never useless to examine the causes and the
facts of a mischievous creed that has its roots deep in the
ignorant fears of mankind; but against the recurrence of the
fatal effects of fanaticism apparent in the earliest and latest
records of the world, there can be no sufficient security.

  [1] That 'speculation has on every subject of human enquiry
  three successive stages; in the first of which it tends to
  explain the phenomena by supernatural agencies, in the
  second by metaphysical abstractions, and in the third or
  final state, confines itself to ascertaining their laws of
  succession and similitude' (_System of Logic_, by J. S.
  Mill), is a generalisation of Positive Philosophy, and a
  theory of the Science of History, consistent probably with
  the progress of knowledge among philosophers, but is
  scarcely applicable to the mass of mankind.

Dreams, magic terrors, miracles, witches, ghosts, portents, are
some of the various forms superstition has invented and magnified
to disturb the peace of society as well as of individuals. The
most extravagant of these need not be sought in the remoter ages
of the human race, or even in the 'dark ages' of European
history: they are sufficiently evident in the legislation and
theology, as well as in the popular prejudices of the seventeenth
century.

The belief in the _infernal_ art of witchcraft is perhaps the
most horrid, as it certainly is the most absurd, phenomenon in
the religious history of the world. Of the millions of victims
sacrificed on the altars of religion this particular delusion can
claim a considerable proportion. By a moderate computation, nine
millions have been burned or hanged since the establishment of
Christianity.[2] Prechristian antiquity experienced its
tremendous power, and the primitive faith of Christianity easily
accepted and soon developed it. It was reserved, however, for the
triumphant Church to display it in its greatest horrors: and if
we deplore the too credulous or accommodative faith of the early
militant Church or the unilluminated ignorance of paganism, we
may still more indignantly denounce the cruel policy of
Catholicism and the barbarous folly of Protestant theology which
could deliberately punish an impossible crime. It is the reproach
of Protestantism that this persecution was most furiously raging
in the age that produced Newton and Locke. Compared with its
atrocities even the Marian burnings appear as nothing: and it may
well be doubted whether the fanatic zeal of the 'bloody Queen,'
is no less contemptible than the credulous barbarity of the
judges of the seventeenth century. The period 1484 (the year in
which Innocent VIII. published his famous 'Witch Hammer' signally
ratified 120 years later by the Act of Parliament of James I. of
England) to 1680 might be characterised not improperly as the era
of devil-worship; and we are tempted almost to embrace the theory
of Zerdusht and the Magi and conceive that Ahriman was then
superior in the eternal strife; to imagine the _Evil One_, as in
the days of the Man of Uz, 'going to and fro in the earth, and
walking up and down in it.' It is come to that at the present
day, according to a more rational observer of the seventeenth
century, that it is regarded as a part of religion to ascribe
great wonders to the devil; and those are taxed with infidelity
and perverseness who hesitate to believe what thousands relate
concerning his power. Whoever does not do so is accounted an
atheist because he cannot persuade himself that there are two
Gods, the one good and the other evil[3]--an assertion which is
no mere hyperbole or exaggeration of a truth: there is the
certain evidence of facts as well as the concurrent testimony of
various writers.

  [2] According to Dr. Sprenger (_Life of Mohammed_). Cicero's
  observation that there was no people either so civilised or
  learned, or so savage and barbarous, that had not a belief
  that the future may be predicted by certain persons (De
  Divinatione, i.), is justified by the faith of Christendom,
  as well as by that of paganism; and is as true of witchcraft
  as it is of prophecy or divination.

  [3] Dr. Balthazar Becker, Amsterdam, 1691, quoted in
  Mosheim's _Institutes of Ecclesiastical History_, ed. Reid.

Those (comparatively few) whose reason and humanity alike
revolted from a horrible dogma, loudly proclaim the prevailing
prejudice. Such protests, however, were, for a long time at
least, feeble and useless--helplessly overwhelmed by the
irresistible torrent of public opinion. All classes of society
were almost equally infected by a plague-spot that knew no
distinction of class or rank. If theologians (like Bishop Jewell,
one of the most esteemed divines in the Anglican Church,
publicly asserting on a well known occasion at once his faith and
his fears) or lawyers (like Sir Edward Coke and Judge Hale) are
found unmistakably recording their undoubting conviction, they
were bound, it is plain, the one class by theology, the other by
legislation. Credulity of so extraordinary a kind is sufficiently
surprising even in theologians; but what is to be thought of the
deliberate opinion of unbiassed writers of a recent age
maintaining the possibility, if not the actual occurrence, of the
facts of the belief?

The deliberate judgment of Addison, whose wit and preeminent
graces of style were especially devoted to the extirpation of
almost every sort of popular folly of the day, could declare:
'When I hear the relations that are made from all parts of the
world, not only from Norway and Lapland, from the East and West
Indies, but from every particular nation in Europe, I cannot
forbear thinking that there is such an intercourse and commerce
with evil spirits as that which we express by the name of
witchcraft.... In short, when I consider the question whether
there are such persons in the world as those we call witches, my
mind is divided between two opposite opinions; or rather, to
speak my thoughts freely, I believe in general that there is and
has been such a thing as witchcraft, but at the same time can
give no credit to any particular modern instance of it.'[4]
Evidence, if additional were wanted, how deference to authority
and universal custom may subdue the reason and understanding. The
language and decision of Addison are adopted by Sir W. Blackstone
in 'Commentaries on the Laws of England,' who shelters himself
behind that celebrated author's sentiment; and Gibbon informs us
that 'French and English lawyers of the present age [the latter
half of the last century] allow the _theory_ but deny the
_practice_ of witchcraft'--influenced doubtless by the spirit of
the past legislation of their respective countries. In England
the famous enactment of the subservient parliament of James I.
against the crimes of sorcery, &c., was repealed in the middle of
the reign of George II., our laws sanctioning not 130 years since
the popular persecution, if not the legal punishment.

  [4] _Spectator_, No. 117. The sentiments of Addison on a
  kindred subject are very similar. Writing about the vulgar
  ghost creed, he adds these remarkable words: 'At the same
  time I think a person who is thus terrified with the
  imagination of ghosts and spectres much more reasonable than
  one who, contrary to the reports of all historians, sacred
  and profane, ancient and modern, and to the traditions of
  all nations, thinks the appearance of spirits fabulous and
  groundless. Could not I give myself up to the general
  testimony of mankind, I should to the relations of
  particular persons who are now living, and whom I cannot
  distrust in other matters of fact.' Samuel Johnson (whose
  prejudices were equalled only by his range of knowledge)
  proved his faith in a well-known case, if afterwards he
  advanced so far as to consider the question as to the
  reality of 'ghosts' as _undecided_. Sir W. Scott, who wrote
  when the profound metaphysical inquiries of Hume had gained
  ground (it is observable), is quite sceptical.

The origin of witchcraft and the vulgar diabolism is to be found
in the rude beginnings of the religious or superstitious feeling
which, known amongst the present savage nations as Fetishism,
probably prevailed almost universally in the earliest ages; while
that of the sublimer magic is discovered in the religious systems
of the ancient Chaldeans and Persians. Chaldea and Egypt were the
first, as far as is known, to cultivate the science of magic: the
former people long gave the well-known name to the professional
practisers of the art. Cicero (_de Divinatione_) celebrates, and
the Jewish prophets frequently deride, their skill in divination
and their modes of incantation. The story of Daniel evidences how
highly honoured and lucrative was the magical or divining
faculty. The Chazdim, or Chaldeans, a priestly caste inhabiting a
wide and level country, must have soon applied themselves to the
study, so useful to their interests, of their brilliant expanse
of heavens. By a prolonged and 'daily observation,' considerable
knowledge must have been attained; but in the infancy of the
science astronomy necessarily took the form of an empirical art
which, under the name of astrology, engaged the serious attention
and perplexed the brains of the medi√¶val students of science or
magic (nearly synonymous terms), and which still survives in
England in the popular almanacks. The natural objects of
veneration to the inhabitants of Assyria were the glorious
luminaries of the sun and moon; and if their worship of the stars
and planets degenerated into many absurd fancies, believing an
intimate connection and subordination of human destiny to
celestial influences, it may be admitted that a religious
sentiment of this kind in its primitive simplicity was more
rational, or at least sublime, than most other religious systems.

It is not necessary to trace the oriental creeds of magic further
than they affected modern beliefs; but in the divinities and
genii of Persia are more immediately traced the spiritual
existences of Jewish and Christian belief. From the Persian
priests are derived both the name and the practice of magic. The
Evil Principle of the Magian, of the later Jewish, and thence of
the western world, originated in the system (claiming Zoroaster
as its founder), which taught a duality of Gods. The philosophic
lawgiver, unable to penetrate the mystery of the empire of evil
and misery in the world, was convinced that there is an equal and
antagonistic power to the representative of light and goodness.
Hence the continued eternal contention between Ormuzd with the
good spirits or genii, Amchaspands, on one side, and Ahriman with
the Devs (who may represent the infernal crew of Christendom) on
the other. Egypt, in the Mosaic and Homeric ages, seems to have
attained considerable skill in magic, as well as in chymistry and
astrology. As an abstruse and esoteric doctrine, it was strictly
confined to the priests, or to the favoured few who were admitted
to initiation. The magic excellence of the magicians, who
successfully emulated the miracles of Moses, was apparently
assisted by a legerdemain similar to that of the Hindu jugglers
of the present day.[5]

  [5] The names of two of these magicians, Jannes and Jambres,
  have been preserved by revelation or tradition.

In Persian theology, the shadowy idea of the devil of western
Asia was wholly different from the grosser conception of
Christendom. Neither the evil principle of Magianism nor the
witch of Palestine has much in common with the Christian. 'No
contract of subjection to a diabolic power, no infernal stamp or
sign of such a fatal league, no revellings of Satan and his
hags,'[6] no such materialistic notions could be conformable to
the spirit of Judaism or at least of Magianism. It is not
difficult to find the cause of this essential dissimilarity. A
simple unity was severely inculcated by the religion and laws of
Moses, which permitted little exercise of the imagination: while
the Magi were equally severe against idolatrous forms. A
monstrous idea, like that of 'Satan and his hags,' was impossible
to them. Christianity, the religion of the West, has received
its _corporeal_ ideas of demonology from the divinities and
demons of heathenism. The Satyri and Fauni of Greece and Rome
have suggested in part the form, and perhaps some of the
characteristics, of the vulgar Christian devil. A knowledge of
the arts of magic among the Jews was probably derived from their
Egyptian life, while the Bedouins of Arabia and Syria (kindred
peoples) may have instilled the less scientific rites of
Fetishism. It is in the early accounts of that people that
sorcery, whatever its character and profession, with the allied
arts of divination, necromancy, incantations, &c., appears most
flourishing. The Mosaic penalty, 'Thou shalt not suffer a witch
to live,' and the comprehensive injunction, 'There shall not be
found among you that maketh his son or his daughter to pass
through the fire, or that useth divination, or an observer of
times, or an enchanter, or a witch, or a charmer, or a consulter
with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer,' indicate
at once the extent and the horror of the practice. Balaam (that
equivocal prophet), on the border-land of Arabia and Palestine,
was courted and dreaded as a wizard who could perplex whole
armies by means of spells. His fame extended far and wide; he was
summoned from his home beyond the Euphrates in the mountains of
Mesopotamia by the Syrian tribes to repel the invading enemy.
This great magician was, it seems, universally regarded as 'the
rival and the possible conqueror of Moses.'[7]

  [6] Sir W. Scott, _Letters on Demonology_.

  [7] Dean Stanley's _Lectures on the Jewish Church_.

About the time when the priestly caste had to yield to a profane
monarchy, the forbidden practices were so notorious and the evil
was of such magnitude, that the newly-elected prince 'ejected'
(as Josephus relates) 'the fortune-tellers, necromancers, and all
such as exercised the like arts.' His interview with the witch
has some resemblance to modern _diablerie_ in the circumstances.
Reginald Scot's rationalistic interpretation of this scene may be
recommended to the commentating critics who have been so much at
a loss to explain it. He derides the received opinion of the
woman of Endor being an agent of the devil, and ignoring any
mystery, believes, 'This Pythonist being a _ventriloqua_, that
is, speaking as it were from the bottom of her belly, did cast
herself into a trance and so abused Saul, answering to Saul
in Samuel's name in her counterfeit hollow voice.[8] An
institution very popular with the Jews of the first temple,
often commemorated in their scriptures--the schools of the
prophets--was (it is not improbable) of the same kind as the
schools of Salamanca and Salerno in the middle ages, where magic
was publicly taught as an abstruse and useful science; and when
Jehu justifies his conduct towards the queen-mother by bringing a
charge of witchcraft, he only anticipates an expedient common and
successful in Europe in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
A Jewish prophet asserts of the Babylonian kings, that they were
diligent cultivators of the arts, reproaching them with
practising against the holy city.

  [8] _Discoverie of Witchcraft_, lib. viii. chap. 12. The
  contrivance of this illusion was possibly like that at
  Delphi, where in the centre of the temple was a chasm, from
  which arose an intoxicating smoke, when the priestess was to
  announce divine revelations. Seated over the chasm upon the
  tripod, the Pythia was inspired, it seems, by the soporific
  and maddening drugs.

Yet if we may credit the national historian (not to mention the
common traditions), the Chaldean monarch might have justly
envied, if he could scarcely hope to emulate, the excellence of a
former prince of his now obscure province. Josephus says of
Solomon that, amongst other attainments, 'God enabled him to
learn that skill which expels demons, which is a science useful
and sanative to men. He composed such incantations also by which
distempers are alleviated, and he left behind him the manner of
using exorcisms by which they drive away demons so that they
never return.'[9] The story of Daniel is well known. In the
captivity of the two tribes carried away into an honourable
servitude he soon rose into the highest favour, because, as we
are informed, he excelled in a divination that surpassed all the
art of the Chaldeans, themselves so famous for it. The inspired
Jew had divined a dream or vision which puzzled 'the magicians,
and the astrologers, and the sorcerers, and the Chaldeans,'
and immediately was rewarded with the greatest gift at the
disposal of a capricious despot. Most of the apologetic writers
on witchcraft, in particular the authors of the 'Malleus
Maleficarum,' accept the assertion of the author of the history
of Daniel that Nebuchadnezzar was 'driven from men, and did eat
grass as oxen,' in its apparent sense, expounding it as plainly
declaring that he was corporeally metamorphosed into an ox, just
as the companions of Ulysses were transformed into swine by the
Circean sorceries.

  [9] _Antiquities_, book viii. 2. Whiston's transl.

The Jewish ideas of good or at least evil spirits or angels were
acquired during their forced residence in Babylon, whether under
Assyrian or Persian government. At least 'Satan' is first
discovered unmistakably in a personal form in the poem of Job, a
work pronounced by critics to have been composed after the
restoration. In the Mosaic cosmogony and legislation, the writer
introduces not, expressly or impliedly, the existence of an evil
principle, unless the serpent of the Paradisaic account, which
has been rather arbitrarily so metamorphosed, represents it;[10]
while the expressions in books vulgarly reputed before the
conquest are at least doubtful. From this time forward (from the
fifth century B.C.), says a German demonologist, as the Jews
lived among the admirers of Zoroaster, and thus became acquainted
with their doctrines, are found, partly in contradiction to the
earlier views of their religion, many tenets prevailing amongst
them the origin of which it is impossible to explain except by
the operation of the doctrines of Zoroaster: to these belongs the
general acceptance of the theory of Satan, as well as of good and
bad angels.[11] Under Roman government or vassalage, sorceric
practices, as they appear in the Christian scriptures, were much
in vogue. Devils or demons, and the 'prince of the devils,'
frequently appear; and the _demoniacs_ may represent the victims
of witchcraft. The Talmud, if there is any truth in the
assertions of the apologists of witchcraft, commemorates many of
the most virtuous Jews accused of the crime and executed by the
procurator of Judea.[12] Exorcism was a very popular and
lucrative profession.[13] Simon Magus the magician (_par
excellence_), the impious pretender to miraculous powers, who
'bewitched the people of Samaria by his sorceries,' is celebrated
by Eusebius and succeeding Christian writers as the fruitful
parent of heresy and sorcery.

  [10] Some ingenious remarks on the subject of the serpent,
  &c., may be found in _Eastern Life_, part ii. 5, by H.
  Martineau.

  [11] Horst, quoted in Ennemoser's _History of Magic_. It has
  been often remarked as a singular phenomenon, that the
  'chosen people,' so prompt in earlier periods on every
  occasion to idolatry and its cruel rites, after its
  restoration under Persian auspices, has been ever since
  uniformly opposed, even fiercely, to any sign contrary to the
  unity of the Deity. But the Magian system was equally averse
  to idolatry.

  [12] Bishop Jewell (_Apology for the Church of England_)
  states that Christ was accused by the malice of his
  countrymen of being a juggler and wizard--_pr√¶stigiator et
  maleficus_. In the apostolic narrative and epistles, sorcery,
  witchcraft, &c., are crimes frequently described and
  denounced. The Sadducean sect alone denied the existence of
  demons.

  [13] The common belief of the people of Palestine in the
  transcendent power of exorcism is illustrated by a miracle
  of this sort, gravely related by Josephus. It was exhibited
  before Vespasian and his army. 'He [Eleazar, one of the
  professional class] put a ring that had a root of one of
  those sorts mentioned by Solomon to the nostrils of the
  demoniac; after which he drew out the demon through his
  nostrils: and when the man fell down immediately he adjured
  him to return into him no more, making still mention of
  Solomon, and reciting the incantations which he composed.
  And when Eleazar would demonstrate to the spectators that he
  had such power, he set a little way off a cup or basin full
  of water, and commanded the demon as he went out of the man
  to overturn it, and thereby to let the spectators know he
  had left the man.' This performance was received with
  contempt or credulity by the spectators according to their
  faith: but the credulity of the believers could hardly
  exceed that of a large number of educated people, who in our
  own generation detect in the miracles of animal magnetism,
  or the legerdemain of jugglers, an infernal or supernatural
  agency.

That witchcraft, or whatever term expresses the criminal
practice, prevailed among the worshippers of Jehovah, is evident
from the repeated anathemas both in their own and the Christian
scriptures, not to speak of traditional legends; but the Hebrew
and Greek expressions seem both to include at least the use of
drugs and perhaps of poison.[14] The Jewish creed, as exposed in
their scriptures, has deserved a fame it would not otherwise
have, because upon it have been founded by theologians, Catholic
and Protestant, the arguments and apology for the reality of
witchcraft, derived from the sacred writings, with an ingenuity
only too common and successful in supporting peculiar prejudices
and interests even of the most monstrous kind.[15]

  [14] _Chashaph_ and _Pharmakeia._ Biblical critics are
  inclined, however, to accept in its strict sense the
  translation of the Jacobian divines. 'Since in the LXX.,'
  says Parkhurst, the lexicographer of the N.T., 'this noun
  [pharmakeia] and its relatives always answer to some Hebrew
  word that denotes some kind of their magical or conjuring
  tricks; and since it is too notorious to be insisted upon,
  that such infernal practices have always prevailed, and do
  still prevail in idolatrous countries, I prefer the other
  sense of incantation.'

  [15] A sort of ingenuity much exercised of late by 'sober
  brows approving with a text' the institution of slavery:
  _divine_, according to them; _the greatest evil that afflicts
  mankind_, according to Alexander von Humboldt. See _Personal
  Narrative_.

In examining the phenomenon as it existed among the Greeks and
Romans, it will be remarked that, while the Greeks seem to have
mainly adopted the ideas of the East, the Roman superstition was
of Italian origin. Their respective expressions for the
predictive or presentient faculty (_manteia_ and _divinatio_), as
Cicero is careful to explain, appear to indicate its different
character with those two peoples: the one being the product of a
sort of madness, the other an elaborate and divine skill. Greek
traditions made them believe that the magic science was brought
from Egypt or Asia by their old philosophic and legislating
sages. Some of the most eminent of the founders of philosophic
schools were popularly accused of encouraging it. Pythagoras (it
is the complaint of Plato) is said to have introduced to his
countrymen an art derived from his foreign travels; a charge
which recalls the names of Roger Bacon, Albertus Magnus, Galileo,
and others, who had to pay the penalty of a premature knowledge
by the suspicion of their cotemporaries. Xenophanes is said
to be the only one of the philosophers who admitted the existence
or providence of the gods, and at the same time entirely
discredited divination. Of the Stoics, Pan√¶tius was the only one
who ventured even to doubt. Some gave credit to one or two
particular modes only, as those of dreams and frenzy; but for the
most part every form of this sort of divine revelation was
implicitly received.[16]

  [16] Cicero, in his second book _De Divinatione_, undertakes
  to refute the arguments of the Stoics, 'the force of whose
  mind, being all turned to the side of morals, unbent itself
  in that of religion.' The divining faculty is divisible
  generally into the artificial and the natural.

The science of magic proper is developed in the later schools of
philosophy, in which Oriental theology or demonology was largely
mixed. Apollonius of Tyana, a modern Pythagorean, is the most
famous magician of antiquity. This great miracle-worker of
paganism was born at the commencement of the Christian era; and
it has been observed that his miracles, though quite independent
of them, curiously coincide both in time and kind with the
Christian.[17] According to his biographer Philostratus, this
extraordinary man (whose travels and researches extended, we are
assured, over the whole East even into India, through Greece,
Italy, Spain, northern Africa, Ethiopia, &c.) must have been in
possession of a scientific knowledge which, compared with that of
his cotemporaries, might be deemed almost supernatural.
Extraordinary attainments suggested to him in later life to
excite the awe of the vulgar by investing himself with magical
powers. Apollonius is said to have assisted Vespasian in his
struggle for the throne of the C√¶sars; afterwards, when accused
of raising an insurrection against Domitian, and when he had
given himself up voluntarily to the imperial tribunal at Rome, he
escaped impending destruction by the exertion of his superhuman
art.

  [17] The proclamation of the birth of Apollonius to his
  mother by Proteus, and the incarnation of Proteus himself,
  the chorus of swans which sang for joy on the occasion, the
  casting out of devils, raising the dead, and healing the
  sick, the sudden appearances and disappearances of
  Apollonius, his adventures in the cave of Trophonius, and
  the sacred voice which called him at his death, to which may
  be added his claim as a teacher having authority to reform
  the world, 'cannot fail to suggest,' says a writer in the
  _Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography_, &c., ed. by Dr.
  W. Smith, 'the parallel passages in the Gospel history.'

Of the incantations, charms, and magic compounds in the practice
of Greek witchcraft, numerous examples occur in the tragic and
comic poetry of Greece; and the _philtres_, or love-charms, of
Theocritus are well known. The names of Colchis, Chaldea,
Assyria, Iberia, Thrace, may indicate the origin of a great part
of the Hellenic sorceries. Yet, if the more honourable science
may have been of foreign extraction, Hellas was not without
something of the sorcery of modern Europe. The infernal goddess
Hecate, of Greek celebrity, is the omnipotent patroness of her
modern Christian slaves; and she presides at the witch meetings
of Christendom with as much solemnity but with far greater
malice. Originally of celestial rank, by a later metamorphosis
connected, if not personally identical with, Persephone,
the Queen of Hades, Hecate was invested with many of the
characteristic attributes of a modern devil, or rather perhaps of
a witch. The triple goddess, in her various shapes, wandered
about at night with the souls of the dead, terrifying the
trembling country people by apparitions of herself and infernal
satellites, by the horrible whining and howls of her hellhounds
which always announced her approach. She frequented cross-roads,
tombs, and melancholy places, especially delighting in localities
famous for deeds of blood and murder. The hobgoblins, the various
malicious demons and spirits, who provoked the lively terrors of
the medi√¶val peoples, had some prototypes in the fairy-land of
Greece, in the Hecatean hobgoblins (like the Latin larv√¶, &c.),
Empusa, Mormo, and other products of an affrighted imagination
familiar to the students of Greek literature in the comic pages
of Aristophanes.[18] From the earliest literary records down to
the latest times of paganism as the state religion, from the
times of the Homeric Circe and Ulysses (the latter has been
recognised by many as a genuine wizard) to the age of Apollonius
or Apuleius, magic and sorcery, as a philosophical science or as
a vulgar superstition, had apparently more or less distinctly a
place in the popular mythology of old Greece. But in the pagan
history of neither Greece nor Rome do we read of holocausts of
victims, as in Christian Europe, immolated on the altars of a
horrid superstition.[19] The occasion of the composition of the
treatise by Apuleius 'On Magic' is somewhat romantic. On his way
to Alexandria, the philosopher, being disabled from proceeding on
the journey, was hospitably received into the mansion of one
Sicinius Pontianus. Here, during the interesting period of his
recovery, he captivated, or was captivated by, the love of his
host's mother, a wealthy widow, and the lovers were soon united
by marriage. Pudentilla's relatives, indignant at the loss of a
much-coveted, and perhaps long-expected fortune, brought an
action against Apuleius for having gained her affection by means
of spells or charms. The cause was heard before the proconsul of
Africa, and the apology of the accused labours to convince his
judges that a widow's love might be provoked without superhuman
means.[20]

  [18] Particularly in the _Batrachoi_. The dread of the
  infernal apparition of the fierce Gorgo in Hades blanched
  the cheek of even much-daring Odysseus (Od. xi. 633). The
  satellites of Hecate have been compared, not
  disadvantageously, with the monstrous guardians of hell;
  than whom

       'Nor uglier follow the night-hag when, called
        In secret, riding through the air she comes
        Lured with the smell of infant blood to dance
        With Lapland witches--.'

  [19] An exceptional case, on the authority of Demosthenes,
  is that of a woman condemned in the year, or within a year
  or two, of the execution of Socrates.

  [20] St. Augustin, in denouncing the Platonic theories of
  Apuleius, of the mediation and intercession of demons
  between gods and men, and exposing his magic heresies, takes
  occasion to taunt him with having evaded his just fate by
  not professing, like the Christian martyrs, his real faith
  when delivering his 'very copious and eloquent' apology (_De
  Civitate Dei_, lib. viii. 19). In the _Golden Ass_ of the
  Greek romancist of the second century, who, in common with
  his cotemporary the great rationalist Lucian, deserves the
  praise of having exposed (with more wit perhaps than
  success) some of the most absurd prejudices of the day, his
  readers are entertained with stories that might pretty
  nearly represent the sentiments of the seventeenth century.

Gibbon observes of the Roman superstition on the authority of
Petronius, that it may be inferred that it was of Italian rather
than barbaric extraction. Etruria furnished the people of Romulus
with the science of divination. Early in the history of the
Republic the law is very explicit on the subject of witchcraft.
In the decemviral code the extreme penalty is attached to the
crime of witchcraft or conjuration: 'Let him be capitally
punished who shall have bewitched the fruits of the earth, or by
either kind of conjuration (_excantando neque incantando_) shall
have conjured away his neighbour's corn into his own field,' &c.,
an enactment sneered at in Justinian's _Institutes_ in Seneca's
words. A rude and ignorant antiquity, repeat the lawyers of
Justinian, had believed that rain and storms might be attracted
or repelled by means of spells or charms, the impossibility of
which has no need to be explained by any school of philosophy. A
hundred and fifty years later than the legislation of the
decemvirs was passed the _Lex Cornelia_, usually cited as
directed against sorcery: but while involving possibly the more
shadowy crime, it seems to have been levelled against the more
'substantial poison.' The conviction and condemnation of 170
Roman ladies for poisoning, under pretence of incantation, was
the occasion and cause. Sulla, when dictator, revived this act
_de veneficiis et malis sacrificiis_, for breach of which the
penalty was 'interdiction of fire and water.' Senatorial
anathemas, or even those of the prince, were ineffective to check
the continually increasing abuses, which towards the end of the
first century of the empire had reached an alarming height.[21]

  [21] It will be observed that _veneficus and maleficus_ are
  the significant terms among the Italians for the criminals.

A general degradation of morals is often accompanied, it has been
justly remarked, by a corresponding increase of the wildest
credulity, and by an abject subservience to external religious
rites in propitiation of an incensed deity. It was thus at Rome
when the eloquence of Cicero, and afterwards the indignant satire
of Juvenal or the calm ridicule of the philosophic Lucian,[22]
attempted to assert the 'proper authority of reason.' To speak
the truth, says Cicero, superstition has spread like a torrent
over the entire globe, oppressing the minds and intellects of
almost all men and seizing upon the weakness of human nature.[23]
The historian of 'The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire'
justifies and illustrates this lament of the philosopher of the
Republic in the particular case of witchcraft. 'The nations and
the sects of the Roman world admitted with equal credulity and
similar abhorrence the reality of that infernal art which was
able to control the eternal order of the planets, and the
voluntary operations of the human mind. They dreaded the
mysterious power of spells and incantations, of potent herbs and
execrable rites, which could extinguish or recall life, influence
the passions of the soul, blast the works of creation, and extort
from the reluctant demons the secrets of Futurity. They believed
with the wildest inconsistency that the preternatural dominion of
the air, of earth, and of hell, was exercised from the vilest
motives of malice or gain by some wrinkled hags or itinerant
sorcerers who passed their obscure lives in penury and contempt.
Such vain terrors disturbed the peace of society and the
happiness of individuals; and the harmless flame which insensibly
melted a waxen image might derive a powerful and pernicious
energy from the affrighted fancy of the person whom it was
maliciously designed to represent. From the infusion of those
herbs which were supposed to possess a supernatural influence, it
was an easy step to the case of more substantial poison; and the
folly of mankind sometimes became the instrument and the mask of
the most atrocious crimes.'[24]

  [22] If the philosophical arguments of Menippus (_Nekrikoi
  Dialogoi_) could have satisfied the interest of the priests
  or the ignorance of the people of after times, the
  _infernal_ fires of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries
  might not have burned.

  [23] _De Divinatione_, lib. ii.

  [24] _The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman
  Empire_, xxv. This description applies more to the Christian
  and later empires.

Latin poetry of the Augustan and succeeding period abounds with
illustrations, and the witches of Horace, Ovid, and Lucan are the
famous classical types.[25] Propertius has characterised the
Striga as 'daring enough to impose laws upon the moon bewitched
by her spells;' while Petronius makes his witch, as potent as
Strepsiades' Thessalian sorceress, exclaim that the very form of
the moon herself is compelled to descend from her position in the
universe at her command. For the various compositions and
incantations in common use, it must be sufficient to refer to the
pages of the Roman poets. The forms of incantation and horrid
rites of the Horatian Sagana Canidia (_Epod._ v. and _Sat._ i.
8), or the scenes described by the pompous verses of the poet
of the civil war (_De Bello Civili_, vi.), where all nature is
subservient, are of a similar kind, but more familiar, in
the dramatic writings of the Elizabethan age. The darker
characteristics of the practice, however, are presented in the
burning declamations of Juvenal, only too faithfully exhibiting
the unnatural atrocities perpetrated in the form and under the
disguise of love-potions and charms. Roman ladies in fact
acquired considerable proficiency, worthy of a Borgia or
Brinvilliers, in the art of poisoning and in the use of drugs.
The reputed witch, both in ancient and modern times, very often
belonged, like the Ovidian Dipsas, to the real and detestable
class of panders: wrinkled hags were experienced in the arts of
seduction, as well as in the employment of poison and drugs more
familiar to the wealthier class (_Sat._ vi.). The great Satirist
wrote in the latter half of the first century of Christianity;
but even in the Augustan period such crimes were prevalent enough
to make Ovid enumerate them among the universal evils introduced
by the Iron age (_Metamorphoses_, i.). The despotic will of the
princes themselves was exerted in vain; the mischief was too
deep-rooted to succumb even to the decrees of the masters of the
world. Nor did the _divi_ themselves disdain to be initiated in
the infernal or celestial science. Nigidius Figulus and the two
Thrasylli are magical or mathematical names closely connected
with the destinies of the two first imperial princes. Nigidius
predicted, and perhaps promoted, the future elevation of
Octavianus; and the elder Thrasyllus, the famous Rhodian
astrologer, skilfully identified his fate with the life of his
credulous dupe but tyrannical pupil. Thrasyllus' art is stated to
have been of service in preventing the superstitious tyrant from
executing several intended victims of his hatred or caprice, by
making _their_ safety the condition of _his_ existence. The
historian of the early empire tells of the incantations which
could 'affect the mind and increase the disease' of Germanicus,
Tiberius' nephew. 'There were discovered,' says Tacitus, 'dug up
from the ground and out of the walls of the house, the remains of
human corpses, charms and spells, and the name of Germanicus
inscribed on leaden tablets, ashes half consumed covered with
decaying matter, and other practices by which it is believed that
souls are devoted to the deities of hell.'[26]

  [25] 'The Canidia of Horace,' Gibbon pronounces, 'is a
  vulgar witch. The Erichtho of Lucan is tedious, disgusting,
  but sometimes sublime.' The love-charms of Canidia and Medea
  are chiefly indebted to the _Pharmakeutria_ of Theocritus.

  [26] _Annales_, ii. 69. Writing of the mathematicians and
  astrologers in the time of Galba, who urged the governor of
  Lusitania on the perilous path to the supreme dignity, the
  historian characterises them truly, in his inimitable
  language and style, as 'a class of persons not to be trusted
  by those in power, deceptive to the expectant; a class which
  will always be proscribed and preserved in our state.'

In the fourth century, the first Christian emperor limited the
lawful exercise of magic to the beneficial use of preserving or
restoring the fruits of the earth or the health of the human
body, while the practice of the noxious charms is capitally
punished. The science of those, proclaims the imperial convert,
who, immersed in the arts of magic, are detected either in
attempts against the life and health of their fellow-men, or in
_charming_ the minds of modest persons to the practice of
debauchery, is to be avenged and punished deservedly by severest
penalties. But in no sorts of criminal charges are those remedies
to be involved which are employed for the good of individuals, or
are harmlessly employed in remote places to prevent premature
rains, in the case of vineyards, or the injurious effects of
winds and hailstorms, by which the health and good name of no one
can be injured; but whose practices are of laudable use in
preventing both the gifts of the Deity and the labours of men
from being scattered and destroyed.[27]

  [27] _Cod. Justinian_, lib. ix. tit. 18.

Constantine, in distinguishing between good and bad magic,
between the _theurgic_ and _goetic_, maintains a distinction made
by the pagans--a distinction ignored in the later Christian
Church, in whose system 'all demons are infernal spirits, and all
commerce with them is idolatry and apostasy.' Christian zeal has
accused the imperial philosopher and apostate Julian of having
had recourse--not to much purpose--to many magical or necromantic
rites; of cutting up the dead bodies of boys and virgins in the
prescribed method; and of raising the dead to ascertain the event
of his Eastern expedition against the Persians.

Not many years after the death of Julian the Christian Empire
witnessed a persecution for witchcraft that for its ferocity, if
not for its folly, can be paralleled only by similar scenes in
the fifteenth or seventeenth century. It began shortly after the
final division of the East and West in the reigns of Valentinian
and Valens, A.D. 373. The unfortunate accused were pursued with
equal fury in the Eastern and Western Empires; and Rome and
Antioch were the principal arenas on which the bloody tragedy was
consummated. Gibbon informs us that it was occasioned by a
criminal consultation, when the twenty-four letters of the
alphabet were ranged round a magic tripod; a dancing ring placed
in the centre pointed to the first four letters in the name of
the future prince. 'The deadly and incoherent mixture of treason
and magic, of poison and adultery, afforded infinite gradations
of guilt and innocence, of excuse and aggravation, which in these
proceedings appear to have been confounded by the angry or
corrupt passions of the judges. They easily discovered that the
degree of their industry and discernment was estimated by the
imperial court according to the number of executions that were
furnished from their respective tribunals. It was not without
extreme reluctance that they pronounced a sentence of acquittal;
but they eagerly admitted such evidence as was stained with
perjury or procured by torture to prove the most improbable
charges against the most respectable characters. The progress of
the inquiry continually opened new subjects of criminal
prosecution; the audacious informers whose falsehood was detected
retired with impunity: but the wretched victim who discovered his
real or pretended accomplices was seldom permitted to receive the
price of his infamy. From the extremity of Italy and Asia the
young and the aged were dragged in chains to the tribunals of
Rome and Antioch. Senators, matrons, and philosophers expired in
ignominious and cruel tortures. The soldiers who were appointed
to guard the prisons declared, with a murmur of pity and
indignation, that their numbers were insufficient to oppose the
flight or resistance of the multitude of captives. The wealthiest
families were ruined by fines and confiscations; the most
innocent citizens trembled for their safety: and we may form some
notion of the magnitude of the evil from the extravagant
assertion of an ancient writer [Ammianus Marcellinus], that in
the obnoxious provinces the prisoners, the exiles, and the
fugitives formed the greatest part of the inhabitants. The
philosopher Maximus,' it is added, 'with some justice was
involved in the charge of magic; and young Chrysostom, who had
accidentally found one of the proscribed books, gave himself up
for lost.'[28]

  [28] _The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman
  Empire_, xxv.

The similarity of this to the horrible catastrophe of Arras,
recorded by the chroniclers of the fifteenth century, excepting
the grosser absurdities of the latter, is almost perfect.
Valentinian and Valens, who seem to have emulated the atrocious
fame of the C√¶sarean family, with their ministers, concealed, it
is probable, under the disguise of a simulated credulity the real
motives of revenge and cupidity.

The Roman world, Christian and pagan, was subject to the
prevailing fear. That portion of the globe, however, comprehended
but a small part of the human race. The records of history are
incomplete and imperfect; nor are they more confined in point of
time than of extent. History is little more at any period than an
imperfect account of the life of a few particular peoples.
Necessarily limited almost entirely to an acquaintance with the
history of that portion of the globe included in the 'Roman
Empire,' we almost forget our profound ignorance of that vastly
larger proportion of the earth's surface, the extra-Roman world,
embracing then, as now, civilised as well as barbarous nations.
The Chinese empire (the most extraordinary, perhaps, and whose
antiquity far surpasses that of any known), comprehending within
its limits two-thirds of the population of the globe; the refined
and ingenious people of Hindustan, an immense population, in the
East: in the Western hemisphere nations in existence whose
remains excited the admiration of the Spanish invaders; the
various savage tribes of the African continent; the nomad
populations of Northern Asia and Europe; nearly all these more or
less, on the testimony of past and present observation,
experienced the tremendous fears of the vulgar demonism.[29]

  [29] It may be safely affirmed, according to a celebrated
  modern philosopher, that popular religions are really, in
  the conception of their more vulgar votaries, a species of
  demonism. 'Primus in orbe deos fecit timor,' or, in the
  fuller expression of a modern, 'Fear made the devils, and
  weak Hope the gods.'

With the tribes who, in the time of C√¶sar or Tacitus, inhabited
the forests of Germany, and, perhaps, amongst the Scandinavians,
some more elevated ideas obtained, the germ, however, of a
degenerated popular prejudice. By all the German tribes, on
the testimony of cotemporary writers, women were held in
high respect, and were believed to have something even divine
in their mental or spiritual faculties. 'Very many of their
women they regard in the light of prophetesses, and when
superstitious fear is in the ascendant, even of goddesses.'
History has preserved the names of some of these Teutonic
_deities_. Veleda, by prophetic inspiration, or by superior genius,
directed the councils of her nation, and for some years
successfully resisted the progress of the imperial arms.[30]
Momentous questions of state or religion were submitted to their
_divine_ judgment, and it is not wonderful if, endowed with
supernatural attributes, they, like other prophets, helped to
fulfil their own predictions. The Britons and Gauls, of the Keltic
race, seem to have resembled the Orientals, rather than the Teutons
or Italians, in their religious systems. Long before the Romans came
in contact with them the magic science is said to have been
developed, and the priests, like those of India or Egypt,
communicated the mysteries only to a privileged few, with
circumstances of profound secrecy. Such was the excellence of the
magic science of the British Druids, that Pliny (_Hist. Nat._
xxx.) was induced to suppose that the Magi of Persia must have
derived their system from Britain. For the most part the Kelts
then, as in the present day, were peculiarly tenacious of a creed
which it was the interest of a priestly caste to preserve. On the
other hand, the looser religion of the Teuton nations, of the
Scandinavians and Germans, could not find much difficulty in
accepting the particular conceptions of the Southern conquerors;
and the sorceric mythology of the Northern barbarians readily
recognised the power of an Erichtho to control the operations of
nature, to prevent or confound the course of the elements,
interrupt the influence of the sun, avert or induce tempests, to
affect the passions of the soul, to fascinate or charm a cruel
mistress, &c., with all the usual necromantic rites. But if they
could acknowledge the characteristics of the Italian Striga,
those nations at the same time retained a proper respect for the
venerated Saga--the German Hexe.

  [30] Aurinia was the Latin name of another of these
  venerable sag√¶. Tacitus, _Histor._ iv. 61, and _Germania_,
  viii.

Of all the historic peoples of ancient Europe, the Scandinavians
were perhaps most imbued with a persuasion of the efficacy of
magic; a fact which their home and their habits sufficiently
explain. In the Eddas, Odin, the leader of the immigration in the
first century, and the great national lawgiver, is represented as
well versed in the knowledge of that preternatural art; and the
heroes of the Scandinavian legends of the tenth or twelfth
century are especially ambitious of initiation. The Scalds,
like the Brahmins or Druids, were possessed of tremendous
secrets; their _runic_ characters were all powerful charms,
whether against enemies, the injurious effects of an evil eye,
or to soften the resentment of a lover.[31] The Northmen, with
the exception of some nations of Central Europe, like the
Lithuanians, who were not christianised until the thirteenth or
fourteenth century, from their roving habits as well perhaps as
from their remoteness, were among the last peoples of Europe to
abandon their old creed. Urged by poverty and the hopes of
plunder, the pirates of the Baltic long continued to be the
terror of the European coasts; but, without a political status,
they were the common outlaws of Christendom. They were the relics
of a savage life now giving way in Europe to the somewhat more
civilised forms of society, continuing their indiscriminate
depredations with impunity only because of the want of union and
organisation among their neighbours. But they were in a
transitional state: the coasts and countries they had formerly
been content to ravage, they were beginning to find it their
interest to colonise and cultivate. In the new interests and
pursuits of civilisation and commerce, a natural disgust might
have been experienced for the savage traditions of a religion
whose gods and heroes were mostly personifications of war and
rapine, under whose banners they had suffered the hardships, if
they had enjoyed the plunder, of a piratic life. The national
deities from being disregarded, must have come soon to be treated
with undisguised contempt at least by the leaders: while the
common people, serfs, or slaves were still immersed (as much as
in Christian Europe) in a stupid superstition.

  [31] The following story exhibits the influence of
  witchcraft among the followers of Odin. Towards the end of
  the tenth century, the dreaded Jomsburg sea-rovers had set
  out on one of their periodical expeditions, and were
  devastating with fire and sword the coast of Norway. A
  celebrated Norwegian Jarl, Hakon, collected all his forces,
  and sailed with a fleet of 150 vessels to encounter the
  pirates. Hakon, after trying in vain to break through the
  hostile line, retired with his fleet to the coast, and
  proceeded to consult a well-known sorceress in whom he had
  implicit confidence for any emergency. With some pretended
  reluctance the sorceress at length informed him that the
  victory could be obtained only by the sacrifice of his son.
  Hakon hesitated not to offer up his only son as a
  propitiatory sacrifice; after which, returning to his fleet,
  and his accustomed post in the front ranks of the battle, he
  renewed the engagement. Towards evening the Jomsburg pirates
  were overtaken and overwhelmed by a violent storm,
  destroying or damaging their ships. They were convinced that
  they saw the witch herself seated on the prow of the Jarl's
  ships with clouds of missile weapons flying from the tips of
  her fingers, each arrow carrying a death-wound. With such of
  his followers as had escaped the sorceric encounter, the
  pirate-chief made the best of his way from the scene of
  destruction, declaring he had made a vow indeed to fight
  against men, but not against witches. A narrative not
  inconsistent with the reply of a warrior to an inquiry from
  the Saint-king Olaf, 'I am neither Christian nor pagan; my
  companions and I have no other religion than a just
  confidence in our strength, and in the good success which
  always attends us in war; and we are of opinion that it is
  all that is necessary.'--Mallet's _Northern Antiquities_.

When men's minds are thus universally unsettled and in want--a
want both universal and necessary in states--of some new
divine objects of worship more suited to advanced ideas and
requirements, a system of religion more civilising and rational
than the antiquated one, will be adopted without much difficulty,
especially if it is not too exclusive. Yet the Scandinavians were
unusually tenacious of the forms of their ancestral worship; for
while the Icelanders are said to have received Christianity about
the beginning of the eleventh century, the people of Norway were
not wholly converted until somewhat later. The halls of Valhalla
must have been relinquished with a sigh in exchange for the less
intelligible joys of a tranquil and insensuous paradise. An
ancient Norsk law enjoins that the king and bishop, with all
possible care, make inquiry after those who exercise pagan
practices, employ magic arts, adore the genii of particular
places, of tombs or rivers, who transport themselves by a
diabolical mode of travelling through the air from place to
place. In the extremity of the northern peninsula (amongst
the Laplanders), where the light of science, or indeed of
civilisation, has scarcely yet penetrated, witchcraft remains as
flourishing as in the days of Odin; and the Laplanders at present
are possibly as credulous in this respect as the old Northmen or
the present tribes of Africa and the South Pacific. Before the
introduction of the new religion (it is a curious fact), the
Germans and Scandinavians, as well as the Jews, were acquainted
with the efficacy of the rite of infant baptism. A Norsk
chronicle of the twelfth century, speaking of a Norwegian
nobleman who lived in the reign of Harald Harfraga, relates that
he poured water on the head of his new-born son, and called him
Hakon, after the name of his father. Harald himself had been
baptized in the same way; and it is noted of the infant pagan St.
Olaf that his mother had him baptized as soon as he was born. The
Livonians observed the same ceremony; and a letter sent expressly
by Pope Gregory III. to St. Boniface, the great apostle of the
Germans, directs him how to act in such cases. It is probable,
Mallet conjectures, that all these people might intend by such a
rite to preserve their children from the sorceries and evil
charms which wicked spirits might employ against them at the
instant of their birth. Several nations of Asia and America have
attributed such a power to ablutions of this kind; nor were the
Romans without the custom, though they did not wholly confine it
to new-born infants. A curious magical use of an initiatory and
sacramental rite, ignorantly anticipated, it seems, by the
unilluminated faith of the pagan world.

In reviewing the characteristics of sorcery which prevailed in
the ancient world, it is obvious to compare the superstition as
it existed in the nations of the East and West, of antiquity and
of modern times. These natural or accidental differences are
deducible apparently from the following causes:--(1) The
essential distinction between the demonology of Orientalism--of
Brahminism, Buddhism, Magianism, Judaism, Mohammedanism--and that
of the West, of paganism and of Christianity, founded on their
respective _idealistic_ and _realistic_ tendencies. (2) The
divining or necromantic faculties have been generally regarded in
the East as honourable properties; whereas in the West they have
been degraded into the criminal follies of an infernal compact.
The magical art is a noble cultivated science--a prerogative of
the priestly caste: witchcraft, in its strict sense, was mostly
abandoned to the lowest, and, as a rule, to the oldest and
ugliest of the female sex. In the one case the proficient was the
master, in the other the slave, of the demons. (3) The position
of the female sex in the Western world has been always very
opposite to their status in the East, where women are believed to
be an inferior order of beings, and therefore incapable of an art
reserved for the superior endowments of the male sex. The modern
witchcraft may be traced to that perhaps oldest form of religious
conception, Fetishism, which still prevails in its utmost
horrors amongst the savage peoples in different parts of the
world. The early practice of magic was not dishonourable in its
origin, closely connected as it was with the study of natural
science--with astronomy and chymistry.

The magic system--interesting to us as having influenced the
later Jewish creed and mediately the Christian--referred like
most developed creeds to a particular founder, Zerdusht
(Zarathustra of the Zend), may have thus originated. Mankind, in
seeking a solution for that most interesting but unsatisfactory
problem, the cause of the predominance of evil on the earth, were
obliged by their ignorance and their fears to imagine, in
addition to the idea of a single supreme existence, the author
and source of good, antagonistic influence--the source and
representative of evil. Physical phenomena of every day
experience; the alternations of light and darkness, of sunshine
and clouds; the changes and oppositions in the outer world, would
readily supply an analogy to the moral world. Thus the dawn and
the sun, darkness and storms, in the wondering mind of the
earlier inhabitants of the globe, may have soon assumed the
substantial forms of personal and contending deities.[32] Such
seems to be the origin of the personifications in the Vedic hymns
of Indra and Vritra with their subordinate ministers (the Ormuzd
and Ahriman, &c., of the Zend-Avesta), and of the first religious
conceptions of other peoples. After this attempt to reconcile the
contradictions, the irregularities of nature, by establishing a
duality of gods whose respective provinces are the happiness and
unhappiness of the human race, the step was easy to the
conviction of the superior activity of a malignant god. The
benevolent but epicurean security of the first deity might seem
to have little concern in defeating or preventing the malicious
schemes of the other. All the infernal apparatus of later ages
was easy to be supplied by a delusive and an unreasoning
imagination.

  [32] The despotism of language and its immense influence on
  the destiny, as well as on the various opinions, of mankind,
  is well shown by Professor Max M√ºller. 'From one point of
  view,' he declares, 'the true history of religion would be
  neither more nor less than an account of the various
  attempts at expressing the Inexpressible' (_Lectures on the
  Science of Language_, Second Series). The witch-creed may be
  indirectly referred, like many other absurdities, to the
  perversion of language.