2. _Homage_

In some places the witches saluted their Chief by falling on their knees,
and also by certain manual gestures; in other places by curtsies and
obeisances. In Scotland, France, and Belgium, another rite was also in
vogue, that of kissing the Devil on any part of his person that he might
direct. At Como and Brescia the witches, 'when they paid reverence to the
presiding demon, bent themselves backwards, lifting a foot in the air
forwards.'[468]

Remigius, writing of the Lorraine witches in 1589, says:

     'Es erzehlte die Beatrix Bayona dass einer unter ihnen allen der
     Oberster wer, welcher in einer Zell auff einem hohen Stuhl sässe, sehr
     ernsthafftig und prächtig heraus, zu demselbigen trete je einer nach
     dem andern, mit Furcht und Zittern, falle ihm zum Zeichen seiner
     Ehrerbietung für die Füsse, und umbfange ihn mit aller Demuth und
     Reverentz.--Erstlich fallen sie nieder auff ihre Knie; darnach legen
     sie die Hände ausswendig zusammen, als diejenigen pflegen zu thun,
     welche obtestiren, jedoch auff dem Rücken und verkehrter Weise, sie
     haben den Rücken zu ihm gewandt, bleiben so lang kniend, biss er
     selbsten zu ihnen sagt, dass es genugsam sey.'[469]

In Somerset (1664) the witches always mention the salutation:

     'At their first meeting the Man in black bids them welcome, and they
     all make low obeysance to him.--[Elizabeth Style, Alice Duke, Anne
     Bishop, Mary Penny] met about nine of the Clock in the Night, in the
     Common near _Trister_ Gate, where they met a Man in black Clothes
     with a little Band, to whom they did Courtesie and due
     observance.--Mary Green [went with others to] Hussey's Knap in the
     Forrest in the Night time, where met them the Fiend in the shape of a
     little Man in black Clothes with a little band, to him all made
     obeysances.... On Thursday Night before Whitsunday last [she met
     several others] and being met they called out _Robin_. Upon which
     instantly appeared a little Man in black Clothes to whom all made
     obeysance, and the little Man put his hand to his Hat, saying, How do
     ye? speaking _low_ but _big_. Then all made low obeysances to him
     again.'[470]

As late as the eighteenth century there is a similar account.[471]

Danaeus (1575) and Cooper (1617) are the only writers who mention the kiss
in their general accounts of the ceremonies. The former says: 'Then biddeth
he th[~e] that they fall down & worship him, after what maner and gesture
of body he pleaseth, and best liketh of. Thus some of them falle downe at
his knees, some offre vnto him black burning cãdles, other kisse him in
some part of his body where he appeareth visibly.'[472] Cooper mentions it
as part of the admission ceremony: 'Secondly, when this acknowledgement is
made, in testimoniall of this subiection, Satan offers his back-parts to be
kissed of his vassall.'[473]

The ceremony is one of the earliest of which there is any record. In 1303 a
Bishop of Coventry was accused at Rome of a number of crimes, amongst
others 'quod diabolo homagium fecerat, et eum fuerit osculatus in
tergo'.[474] Guillaume Edeline was tried in 1453; he was 'docteur en
théologie, prieur de S. Germain en Laye, et auparavant Augustin, et
religieux de certaines aultres ordres. Confessa ledit sire Guillaume, de sa
bonne et franche voulenté, avoir fait hommage audit ennemy en l'espèce et
semblance d'ung mouton, en le baisant par le fondement en signe de
révérence et d'hommage.'[475] Martin Tulouff, tried in Guernsey in 1563,
went to a meeting, 'ou ly avoet chinq ou vi chatz, d'ou il y en avoet ung
qui estoit noir, qui menoit la dance, et d^t [*q] il estoit sur ses pieds
plat, et que ladite Collennette le besa [*p] de derriere, et luy [*p] la
crysse. Et luy dist ladite vieillesse [*q] ledit chat estoit le
diable.'[476] Estebène de Cambrue, in 1567, described the ceremonies at the
Sabbath: 'Ils se mettent à dancer à l'entour d'une pierre, sur laquelle est
assis vn grand homme noir, qu'elles appellent Mõsieur, & chacun de
l'assemblee luy va baiser le derriere.'[477] The witches of Poictiers in
1574 'dansoyent à l'entour du bouc: puis vn chacun luy baisoit le
derriere'.[478] The same ceremony took place at North Berwick in 1590: 'Now
efter that the deuell had endit his admonitions, he cam down out of the
pulpit, and caused all the company to com and kiss his ers, quhilk they
said was cauld lyk yce.'[479] Jane Bosdeau confessed that at meetings at
Puy-de-Dôme in 1594 'all the Witches had Candles which they lighted at his,
and danced in a Circle Back to Back. They kiss'd his Backside, and pray'd
that he would help them.'[480] Andro Man of Aberdeen in 1597 confessed
'that all thay quha convenis with thame kissis Christsonday and the Quene
of Elphenis airss'.[481] Rolande de Vernois in 1598 'confessa que le Diable
se presenta pour lors au Sabbat en forme d'vn gros chat noir. Que tous
ceux, qui estoient au Sabbat, alloient baiser ce gros chat noir au
derriere.'[482] Cornélie van Beverwyck, aged 75, at Ghent in 1598, was
accused that 'vous n'avez pas craint de vous agenouiller devant lui, de lui
rendre hommage et de baiser son derriere en signe de soumission'.[483]
Claire Goessen in 1603 went to 'l'assemblée nocturne de Lembeke, où, après
la danse, elle a, comme tous les assistans, baisé un bouc à l'endroit de sa
queue'.[484] Jeannette d'Abadie in 1609 in the Basses-Pyrénées said,
regarding the renunciation which she made on admission, 'il luy faisoit
renouueller toutes les fois qu'elle alloit au sabbat, puis elle l'alloit
baiser au derriere.'[485] At the celebrated trial of Louis Gaufredy at Aix
in 1610, Magdalene de Demandouls gave a detailed account of the homage
rendered by the witches:

     'First the hagges and witches, who are people of a sordid and base
     condition, are the first that come to adore the Prince of the
     Synagogue, who is Lucifers lieftenant, and he that now holdeth that
     place is Lewes Gaufridy: then they adore the Princesse of the
     Synagogue who is a woman placed at his right hand. Next they goe and
     worship the Diuell who is seated in a Throne like a Prince. In the
     second place come the Sorcerers and Sorceresses, who are people of a
     middle condition, and these performe the same kind of adoration with
     the former, kneeling vpon the ground, but not prostrating themselves
     as doe the other; although they kisse the hands and feet of the Diuell
     as the first likewise doe. In the third place come the Magicians who
     are Gentlemen and people of a higher ranke.'[486]

Isobel Gowdie of Auldearne in 1662 said, 'Somtym he vold be lyk a stirk, a
bull, a deir, a rae, or a dowg, and he vold hold wp his taill wntill we
wold kiss his arce.'[487] The explanation of this rite is given in the
French authorities:

     'Le Diable estoit en forme de bouc, ayant vne queue, & au dessoubs vn
     visage d'homme noir, où elle fut contrainte le baiser.--[Elle] depose,
     Que la premiere fois qu'elle luy fut presentee elle le baisa à ce
     visage de derriere au dessoubs d'vne grande queuë: qu'elle l'y a baisé
     par trois fois, & qu'il auoit aussi ce visage faict comme le museau
     d'vn bouc.--Il a vne grande queuë au derriere, & vne forme de visage
     au dessoubs: duquel visage il ne profere aucune parole, ains luy sert
     pour le donner à baiser à ceux qui bon luy semble.--Es festes
     solemnelles on baisoit le Diable au derriere, mais les notables
     sorcieres le baisoient au visage.'[488] The two faces are thus
     distinctly vouched for, and the use of them seems to have been to
     distinguish the position of the witch in the society. The mask or
     disguise is clearly indicated in the evidence of Isaac de Queyron, who
     with others 'le baiserent á vne fesse qui estoit blanche & rouge, &
     auoit la forme d'vne grande cuisse d'vn homme, & estoit velue'.[489]

The Devil was also kissed on other parts of his person. Marion Grant of the
Aberdeen witches (1597) confessed that he 'causit the kis him in dyvers
pairtis, and worship him on thy kneis as thy lord'.[490] Some of the Lyons
witches 'le baiserent aux parties honteuses de derriere: les autres le
baisent sur l'espaule.'[491] Jeannette d'Abadie in the Basses-Pyrénées
(1609) confessed 'que le Diable luy faisoit baiser son visage, puis le
nombril, puis le membre viril, puis son derriere'.[492] In connexion with
this last statement, it is worth comparing Doughty's account of an Arab
custom: 'There is a strange custom, (not only of nomad women, but in the
Arabic countries even among Christians, which may seem to remain of the old
idolatry among them,) of mothers, their gossips, and even young maidens,
visiting married women to kiss with a kind of devotion the _hammam_ of the
male children.'[493]