II. THE GOD

1. _As God_


It is impossible to understand the witch-cult without first understanding
the position of the chief personage of that cult. He was known to the
contemporary Christian judges and recorders as the Devil, and was called by
them Satan, Lucifer, Beelzebub, the Foul Fiend, the Enemy of Salvation, and
similar names appropriate to the Principle of Evil, the Devil of the
Scriptures, with whom they identified him.

This was far from the view of the witches themselves. To them this
so-called Devil was God, manifest and incarnate; they adored him on their
knees, they addressed their prayers to him, they offered thanks to him as
the giver of food and the necessities of life, they dedicated their
children to him, and there are indications that, like many another god, he
was sacrificed for the good of his people.

The contemporary writers state in so many words that the witches believed
in the divinity of their Master. Danaeus, writing in 1575, says, 'The
Diuell co[~m]aundeth them that they shall acknowledge him for their god,
cal vp[~o] him, pray to him, and trust in him.--Then doe they all repeate
the othe which they haue geuen vnto him; in acknowledging him to be their
God.'[27] Gaule, in 1646, nearly a century later, says that the witches vow
'to take him [the Devil] for their God, worship, invoke, obey him'.[28]

The witches are even more explicit, and their evidence proves the belief
that their Master was to them their God. The accusation against Elisabeth
Vlamyncx of Alost, 1595, was that 'vous n'avez pas eu honte de vous
agenouiller devant votre Belzebuth, que vous avez adoré'.[29] The same
accusation was made against Marion Grant of Aberdeen, 1596, that 'the
Deuill quhome thow callis thy god ... causit the worship him on thy kneis
as thy lord'.[30] De Lancre (1609) records, as did all the Inquisitors,
the actual words of the witches; when they presented a young child, they
fell on their knees and said, 'Grand Seigneur, lequel i'adore', and when
the child was old enough to join the society she made her vow in these
words: 'Ie me remets de tout poinct en ton pouuoir & entre tes mains, ne
recognois autre Dieu: si bien que tu es mon Dieu'.[31] Silvain Nevillon,
tried at Orleans in 1614, said, 'On dit au Diable nous vous recognoissons
pour nostre maistre, nostre Dieu, nostre Createur'.[32] The Lancashire
witch, Margaret Johnson, 1633, said: 'There appeared vnto her a spirit or
divell in the similitude and proportion of a man. And the said divell or
spirit bidd her call him by the name of Mamillion. And saith, that in all
her talke and conferense shee calleth her said Divell Mamillion, my
god.'[33] According to Madame Bourignon, 1661, 'Persons who were thus
engaged to the Devil by a precise Contract, will allow no other God but
him'.[34] Isobel Gowdie confessed that 'he maid vs beliew that ther wes no
God besyd him.--We get all this power from the Divell, and when ve seik it
from him, ve call him "owr Lord".--At each tyme, quhan ve wold meitt with
him, we behoowit to ryse and mak our curtesie; and we wold say, "Ye ar
welcom, owr Lord," and "How doe ye, my Lord."'[35] The Yorkshire witch,
Alice Huson, 1664, stated that the Devil 'appeared like a _Black Man_ upon
a Black Horse, with Cloven Feet; and then I fell down, and did Worship him
upon my Knees'.[36] Ann Armstrong in Northumberland, 1673, gave a good deal
of information about her fellow witches: 'The said Ann Baites hath severall
times danced with the divell att the places aforesaid, calling him,
sometimes, her protector, and, other sometimes, her blessed saviour.--She
saw Forster, Dryden, and Thompson, and the rest, and theire protector,
which they call'd their god, sitting at the head of the table.--When this
informer used meanes to avoyd theire company, they threatned her, if she
would not turne to theire god, the last shift should be the worst.'[37] At
Crighton, 1678, the Devil himself preached to the witches, 'and most
blasphemously mocked them, if they offered to trust in God who left them
miserable in the world, and neither he nor his Son Jesus Christ ever
appeared to them when they called on them, as he had, who would not cheat
them'.[38] Even in America, 1692, Mary Osgood, the wife of Capt. Osgood,
declared that 'the devil told her he was her God, and that she should serve
and worship him'.[39]

Prayers were addressed to the Master by his followers, and in some
instances the prayer was taught by him. Alice Gooderidge of Stapenhill in
Derbyshire, 1597, herself a witch and the daughter of a witch, was charged
by Sir Humphrey Ferrers 'with witchcraft about one Michael's Cow: which Cow
when shee brake all thinges that they tied her in, ranne to this Alice
Gooderige her house, scraping at the walls and windowes to haue come in:
her olde mother Elizabeth Wright, tooke vpon her to help; vpon condition
that she might haue a peny to bestow vpon her god, and so she came to the
mans house kneeled downe before the Cow, crossed her with a sticke in the
forehead, and prayed to her god, since which time the Cow continued
wel'.[40] Antide Colas, 1598, confessed that 'Satan luy commãda de le prier
soir & matin, auant qu'elle s'addonnat à faire autre oeuure'.[41] Elizabeth
Sawyer, the witch of Edmonton, 1621, was taught by the Devil; 'He asked of
me to whom I prayed, and I answered him to Iesus Christ, and he charged me
then to pray no more to Iesus Christ, but to him the Diuell, and he the
Diuell taught me this prayer, _Sanctibecetur nomen tuum_, Amen'.[42] Part
of the dittay against Jonet Rendall, an Orkney witch, 1629, was that 'the
devill appeirit to you, Quhom ye called Walliman.--Indyttit and accusit for
y^t of your awne confessioune efter ye met your Walliman upoun the hill ye
cam to Williame Rendalls hous quha haid ane seik hors and promeised to
haill him if he could geve yow tua penneys for everie foot, And haveing
gottin the silver ye hailled the hors be praying to your Walliman, Lykeas
ye have confest that thair is nather man nor beast sick that is not tane
away be the hand of God bot for almis ye ar able to cur it be praying to
your Walliman, and yt thair is nane yt geves yow almis bot they will thryve
ather be sea or land it ye pray to yor Walliman'.[43] The witches of East
Anglia, 1645, also prayed; '_Ellen_ the wife of _Nicholas Greenleife_ of
_Barton_ in _Suffolke_, confessed, that when she prayed she prayed to the
Devill and not to God.--_Rebecca West_ confessed that her mother prayed
constantly (and, as the world thought, very seriously), but she said it was
to the devil, using these words, _Oh my God, my God_, meaning him and not
the LORD.'[44]

A good example of the change of the word 'God', when used by the witch,
into the word 'devil' when recorded by the Christian writer, is found at
Bute in 1662: 'Jonet Stewart declares that quhen Alester McNivan was lying
sick that Jonet Morisone and NcWilliam being in her house the said Jonet
desyred NcWilliam to goe see the said Allester the said NcWilliam lifting
up her curcheffe said "devill let him never be seene till I see him and
devill let him never ryse" ... [NcWilliam was asked] if she lifted up her
curcheffe quhen Jonet Morisone desyred her to goe see Alester McNivan,
saying "god let him never ryse till I goe see him."'[45]