4. _Discipline_

Discipline was maintained by a system of rewards and punishments, enforced
or relaxed according to the personal character of the Chief. As a rule only
the severer punishments are recorded, but occasionally there are
indications of minor chastisements.

The contemporary writers make the system of rewards and punishments very
clear:

     'Satan calleth them togither into a Diuelish Sinagoge, and that he may
     also vnderstand of them howe well and diligently they haue fulfilled
     their office of intoxicating committed vnto them, and whõ they haue
     slaine.'[795] 'Such as are absent, and have no care to be assoygned,
     are amerced to this paenalty, so to be beaten on the palms of their
     feete, to be whipt with iron rods, to be pincht and suckt by their
     Familiars till their heart blood come, till they repent them of their
     sloath, and promise more attendance and diligence for the
     future.'[796] '_Taking account also of the proceedings_ of his other
     Schollers, and so approuing or condemning accordingly.'[797] Sometimes
     at their solemn assemblies, the Devil commands, that each tell what
     wickedness he hath committed, and according to the hainousness and
     detestableness of it, he is honoured and respected with a general
     applause. Those on the contrary, that have done no evil, are beaten
     and punished.'[798]

The usual punishment was beating, which was inflicted for various offences,
chiefly disrespect or neglect of duty. At Arras in 1460 Jean Tacquet, a
rich eschevin, 'had endeavoured to withdraw his allegiance from Satan who
had forced him to continue it by beating him cruelly with a bull's
pizzle.'[799] In Lorraine (1589) the Grand Master seems to have been
peculiarly brutal:

     'Jana Gerardina, Catharina Russa, und Francisca Fellaea bezeugten,
     dass sie mehr als einmal schwerlich mit harten Streichen hätten büssen
     müssen, wenn sie keinen Schaden oder Unglück angestifft hätten. Und
     wie Nicolaea Morelia sagt, hat er sie dermassen zerschlagen, dass ihr
     der Athem davon ausgeblieben, und sie bey nahe gestorben wäre; Uber
     welches sich dann nicht zu verwundern sey, sintemahl er eiserne Hände
     habe, mit denen er ihnen so unbarmhertzig die Köpffe zerschlagen, dass
     sie deren nicht mehr empfinden.'[800]

In the Lyons district (1598) 'les Sorciers rendent conte à Satan de ce
qu'ils ont fait dés la derniere assemblée, estans ceux là les mieux venus
qui ont commis le plus de meschancetez. Les autres sont sifflez & mocquez
de tous; l'on les fait mettre à l'escart, & sont encor le plus souuent
battus & maltraitez de leur Maistre'.[801] According to Bodin, 'chacun
Sorcier doit rendre compte du mal qu'il a faict sur peine d'estre bien
battu.'[802] De Lancre says, 'Les Sorciers le vont adorer trois nuicts
durant. Ceux qui par nonchalance, ou autre petit empeschement ne s'y
trouuent, sont foüettez & battus à l'outrance.'[803] Alexander Hamilton
(1630) stated that 'thair was ane new tryst appointed be him to be keipit
wt thame altogidder within xiii days thereftir upon the cauldbit mure
Quhilk meitting was nocht keipit be the said Alexr for the quhilk caus and
breking of that tryst the said Alexr was maist rigorouslie strukin be the
devill wt ane battoun at ane meitting keipit betuix thame schortlie
thereftir upone gairnetoune hillis'.[804] In France (1652) two sisters were
tried for witchcraft: 'Icelle confesse n'avoir faict mourir qu'un vaulx et
d'avoir été battu par le diable, deux fois, parce qu'elle ne vouloit faire
mourir aultres personnes et bestiault.' The other sister was 'interrogée sy
le diable ne luy avoit conseillé de cracher la Sainte Hostie hors de sa
bouche, ou bien ne la point recepvoir, dist que non, mais bien que le
diable l'at une fois battue fort parce qu'elle l'avoit receu'.[805] The
girls at Lille (1661) informed Madame Bourignon that the witches 'are
constrained to offer him their Children, or else the Devil would Beat
them'.[806] Isobel Gowdie's account is, as usual, very full:

     'Som tymis, among owr felwis, we wold be calling him "Blak Johne", or
     the lyk, and he wold ken it, and heir ws weill aneughe; and he ewin
     then com to ws, and say, "I ken weill aneughe what [3*]e wer sayeing
     of me!" And then he vold beat and buffet ws werie sor. We wold be
     beattin if ve wer absent any tyme, or neglect any thing that wold be
     appointit to be done. Allexr Elder, in Earlseat, vold be werie often
     beattin. He is bot soft, and cowld never defend him self in the leist,
     bot greitt and cry, quhan he vold be scourging him. Bot Margret
     Wilson, in Auldearne, wold defend hir selfe fynelie, and cast wp hir
     handis to keip the stroakis off from hir; and Bessie Wilson would
     speak crustie with hir townge, and wold be belling again to him
     stowtlie. He wold be beatting and scurgeing ws all wp and downe with
     cardis [cords] and vther sharp scurges, like naked gwhastis; and we
     wold still be cryeing, "Pittie! pittie! Mercie! mercie, owr Lord!" Bot
     he wold haue neither pittie nor mercie. When he vold be angrie at ws,
     he wold girne at ws lyk a dowge, as iff he wold swallow ws wp.'[807]

The Swedish witches (1669) also had reason to complain of their
Grand-Master's cruelty: 'heretofore it was sufficient to carry but one of
their Children [to the meeting] or a strangers Child with them, but now he
did plague them and whip them if they did not procure him Children.'[808]
Among the Northumberland witches (1673):

     'All of them who had donne harme gave an account thereof to their
     protector, who made most of them that did most harme, and beate those
     who had donne no harme.--At the said meeting their particular divell
     tooke them that did most evill, and danced with them first, and called
     every of them to an account, and those that did most evill he maid
     most of.--The devill, in the forme of a little black man and black
     cloaths, calld of one Isabell Thompson, of Slealy, widdow, by name,
     and required of her what service she had done him. She replyd she had
     gott power of the body of one Margarett Teasdale. And after he had
     danced with her he dismissed her and call'd of one Thomasine, wife of
     Edward Watson, of Slealy.'[809]

Punishments for minor offences are rarely recorded. At North Berwick
(1590), when the witches returned after sinking a ship, 'seeing that they
tarried over long, hee at their comming enjoyned them all to a pennance,
which was, that they should kisse his buttockes, in sign of duety to
him.'[810] At Aberdeen (1597) Christen Mitchell confessed that when the
Devil asked her to join, 'thow ansuerit, I will enter in thy band, bot I
will nocht byd thairin; and thairefter that the Devill gawe the a wisk, and
thow fell on thy face one the dyk of that yaird.'[811] Beigis Tod, who
belonged to one of the North Berwick Covens but was not tried till 1608,
was late in arriving at a meeting, 'quhair the Deuill appeirit to thame,
and reprovet the said Beigis Tod verrie scherplie, for hir long tayreing;
to quhome scho maid this ansuer, "Sir, I could wyn na soner."'[812] At
Lille if any witch desired to leave the religion, 'the Devil reproves them
then more severely, and obligeth them to new Promises.'[813] Occasionally
the witches kept discipline among themselves; this seems to have been the
case only when the culprit prevented the proper execution of magical
performances. At Aberdeen Thomas Leyis 'led the ring, and dang the said
Kathren Mitchell, becaus scho spillit your dans, and ran nocht sa fast
about as the rest.'[814] At Auldearne Isobel Gowdie described how the
witches used flint arrow-heads: 'I shot at the Laird of Park, as he ves
crossing the Burn of Boath; bot, thankis to God now, that he preserwit him.
Bessie Hay gaw me a great cuffe, becaus I missed him.'[815] The former
minister of Crighton, Mr. Gideon Penman, acted as the Devil's chaplain;
'ordinarily Mr. Gideon was in the rear in all their dances, and beat up all
those that were slow.'[816] But a reasonable excuse for trifling
misdemeanours could be accepted: 'The devill asked at Kathrine Moore quhair
hir Husband was that he came not she answered there was a young bairne at
home and that they could not both come.'[817]

Capital punishment was reserved for traitors, actual and potential. It must
have been brought into use only after the cult had fallen upon evil days,
and then only when the Chief himself was in danger. Beating to death,
hanging, and poison were the usual means of execution.

The earliest instance occurred in 1450, when the Church had begun to use
its power systematically against the witches. 'The Inquisitor of Como,
Bartolomeo de Homate, the podestà Lorenzo da Carorezzo, and the notary
Giovanni da Fossato, either out of curiosity or because they doubted the
witches whom they were trying, went to a place of assembly at Mendrisio and
witnessed the scene from a hiding-place. The presiding demon pretended not
to know their presence, and in due course dismissed the assembly, but
suddenly recalled his followers and set them on the officials, who were so
beaten that they died within fifteen days.'[818] Alesoun Peirson (1588) was
burnt as a witch, having gained her knowledge from the fairies, who
threatened that 'gif scho wald speik and tell of thame and thair doingis,
thay sould martir hir'.[819] The Lorraine witches (1589) took an oath of
silence, 'welchen Eyd sie so hoch und heilig halten, dass wenn sie
Eydbrüchig werden, so darfür halten, also ob sie ewig darumb musten
verdampt und gestrafft seyn.'[820] Alice Gooderidge, the Derbyshire witch
(1597), was tried for witchcraft, 'she should haue bin executed, but that
her spirit killed her in the prison.'[821] Jeannette d'Abadie (1609) was
more fortunate than most in that she was not killed, 'elle a esté battue au
sabbat reellement & corporellem[~e]t par deux sorcieres qu'elle nomme, par
ce qu'elle auoit reuelé les mysteres du sabbat.'[822] John Stewart, the
'juglour' of Irvine (1618)--

     'for his better preferring to the day of the assys, was put in ane
     lockfast buith, quhair no maner of persoun might haif access to him
     quhil the dounsitting of the justice court, and for avoyding of
     putting violent handis on himself, was verie strictly gairdit and
     flitherit be the airms, as us is, and upon that same day of the assys,
     about half ane hour befoir the doun sitting of the justice court, Mr.
     David Dickson, minister at Irving; and Mr. George Dunbar, minister of
     Air, having went to him to exhort him to call on his God for mercie
     for his bygane wicked and evil lyf and that God wold of his infinite
     mercie, lowis him out of the handis of the devil quhom he had servit
     thir mony years by gane He acquiescit to their prayer and godlie
     exhortation, and utterit thir wordis--I am so straitlie gairdit that
     it lyis not in my hand to tak off my bonnett, nor to gett bread to my
     mouth. And immediately after the departing of the two ministers from
     him, the Juglour being sent for at the desyr of my Lord of Eglintoune,
     to be confrontit with ane woman of the burgh of Air, callit Janet
     Bous, quha was apprehendit by the Magistrates of the burghe of Air,
     for witchcraft, to the burghe of Irvine, purposlie for that effer. He
     was fund be the burrow officers, quha went about him stranglit and
     hangit be the cruik of the dur, with ane tait of hemp (or a string
     maid of hemp, supposed to haif been his garten, or string of his
     bonnet) not above the length of twa span long, his kneyis not being
     from the grund half ane span, and was brocht out of the hous, his lyf
     not being so layt expellit: but notwithstanding of quhatsomever meines
     usit to the contrair for remeid of his lyf, he revievit not, but so
     endit his lyf miserable by the help of the devill his maister.'[823]

Rebecca West, a young Essex witch (1645), confessed to Matthew Hopkins that
'if shee should discover any thing, they all told the said Rebecca, shee
should endure more torments on earth, then could be in hell: and the said
Rebecca told this informant that shee promised to keepe all their secrets;
and moreover they all told her, that shee must never confesse any thing,
although the rope were about her necke, and shee ready to be hanged'.[824]
In Fifeshire (1649) 'ane Mistres Hendersone (sister to Fordell Hendersone,
in the presbytrey of Dumfermling), sometymes lady of Pittahro, being
delated by many to be a witch, was apprehended and caried to Edenbroughe,
wher she was keiped fast; and after her remaining in prison for a tyme,
being in health att night, vpon the morne was founde dead. It was thought,
and spoken by many, that she wronged her selfe, either by strangling or by
poyson.'[825] The Swedish children (1670) were not spared: 'if the Children
did at any time name the Names of those that had carried them away, they
were again carried by force either to Blockula, or to the Cross way, and
there miserably beaten, insomuch that some of them died of it.'[826]
Whether Deliverance Hobbs (1692) was actually beaten, or whether her
statement was made from the knowledge of what might happen to her, cannot
be certain without reference to the records of the trial itself, as
Mather's bias is apt to distort the evidence: 'She now testifi'd, that this
_Bishop_ tempted her to Sign the _Book_ again, and to deny what she had
confess'd. She affirm'd, that it was the Shape of this Prisoner, which
whipped her with Iron Rods, to compel her thereunto.'[827] Elizabeth
Anderson in Renfrewshire (1696) went with her father to a witch-meeting,
'severals of them being affraid that the Declarant would Confess, and tell
of them as she done formerly on her Grand-mother, they threatened to tear
her all in pieces if she did so.'[828] John Reid of the same Coven--

     'after his Confession had called out of his prison Window, desiring
     Baily Scott to keep that old body Angus Forrester, who had been his
     fellow prisoner, closs and secure; whereupon the company asked John
     when they were leaving him on Friday night the 21th of May, whether he
     desired company or would be afraid alone, he said he had no fear of
     anything: So being left till Saturday in the Forenoon, he was found in
     this posture, viz. sitting upon a stool which was on the Hearth of the
     Chimney, with his feet on the floor and his Body straight upward, his
     shoulders touching the lintel of the Chimney, but his Neck tyed with
     his own neck-cloath (whereof the knot was behind) to a small stick
     thrust into a hole above the lintel of the Chimney, upon which the
     Company, especially John Campbel a Chyrurgeon who was called, thought
     at first in respect of his being in an ordinary posture of sitting,
     and the neck-cloath not having any drawn knot (or _run loup_) but an
     ordinary one which was not very strait, and the sticke not having the
     strength to bear the weight of his Body or the struggle, that he had
     not been quite dead; but finding it otherways, and that he was in such
     a Situation that he could not have been the Actor thereof himself,
     concluded that some extraordinary Agent had done it, especially
     considering that the Door of the Room was secured, and that there was
     a board set over the Window which was not there the night before when
     they left him.'[829]

A similar fate befell the warlock Playfair in 1597. He was found strangled
in his prison at Dalkeith with the 'point' of his breeches tied round his
neck.[830]