3. _Identification_

As it is certain that the so-called 'Devil' was a human being, sometimes
disguised and sometimes not, the instances in which these persons can be
identified are worth investigating. In most cases these are usually men,
and the names are often given, but it is only in the case of the Devil of
North Berwick that the man in question is of any historic importance; the
others are simply private individuals of little or no note.

Elizabeth Stile of Windsor, in 1579, gives a description of Father
Rosimond's changes of form, which points to his being the Chief of the
Windsor witches: 'She confesseth, her self often tymes to haue gon to
Father Rosimond house where she founde hym sittyng in a Wood, not farre
from thence, vnder the bodie of a Tree, sometymes in the shape of an Ape,
and otherwhiles like an Horse.'[132] In the reign of Elizabeth, 1584, there
is a list of eighty-seven suspected persons, among whom occur the names of
'Ould Birtles the great devil, Roger Birtles and his wife and Anne Birtles,
Darnally the sorcerer, the oulde witche of Ramsbury, Maud Twogood
Enchantress, Mother Gillian witch' and several other 'oulde witches'.[133]
The account by John Stearne the pricker, in 1645, indicates that one of the
magistrates of Fenny Drayton was the local Devil: 'Some will say, It is
strange they should know when they should be searched, if it be kept
private. I answer, Let it be kept never so private, it hath been common,
and as common as any other thing, as they themselves have confessed: for so
did they of Fenny-Drayton in Cambridge-shire, who made very large
Confessions, as, that the devil told them of our coming to town.'[134] One
of the clearest cases, however, is that of Marsh of Dunstable in 1649,
'whom Palmer confessed to be head of the whole Colledge of Witches, that
hee knows in the world: This Palmer hath been a witch these sixty years (by
his own confession) long enough to know and give in the totall summe of all
the conjuring conclave, and the Society of Witches in England.'[135]

In Scotland a certain number of identifications are also possible. Alison
Peirson, tried in 1588, learnt all her charms and obtained all her
knowledge from the Devil, who came to her in the form of Mr. William
Sympson, her mother's brother's son, who was a great scholar and doctor of
medicine in Edinburgh.[136] Jonet Stewart in 1597 'learnt her charms from
umquhill Michaell Clark, smyth in Laswaid, and fra ane Italean strangear
callit Mr. John Damiet, ane notorious knawin Enchanter and Sorcerer'.[137]
In the trial of Marion Pardon of Hillswick in 1644 'it was given in
evidence that a man spoke of the devil as Marion Pardon's pobe, i.e.
nurse's husband or foster father'.[138] In a case tried at Lauder in 1649
there is an indication that one of the magistrates was the Chief of the
witches; Robert Grieve accused a certain woman at a secret session of the
court, 'but the Devil came that same night unto her, and told her that Hob
Grieve had fyled her for a witch'.[139] Isobel Ramsay in 1661 was accused
that 'you had ane uther meiting wt the devill in yor awne hous in the
liknes of yor awne husband as you wes lying in yor bed at qch tyme you
engadged to be his servant and receaved a dollar from him'.[140] When a man
had special knowledge as to which women were witches, it is suggestive that
he might be himself the Devil; as in the case of the Rev. Allan Logan, who
'was particularly knowing in the detection of witches. At the
administration of the communion, he would cast his eye along, and say: "You
witch wife, get up from the table of the Lord", when some poor creature
would rise and depart.'[141]

It seems probable that the infamous Abb√© Guibourg was the head of the Paris
witches, for it was he who celebrated the 'black mass' and performed the
sacrifice of a child, both of which were the duties of the 'Devil'.[142]

At Salem also the account given by the witches of the Rev. George Burroughs
points to his filling the office of 'Devil', for he was 'Head Actor at some
of their Hellish Randezvouses, and one who had the promise of being a King
in Satan's kingdom.--He was the person who had Seduc'd and Compell'd them
into the snares of Witchcraft'.[143] That Burroughs was a religious person
is no argument against his being also the 'Devil' of Salem. Apart from the
well-known psychological fact that a certain form of religious feeling can
exist at the same time as the propensity to and practice of sexual
indulgence, there is proof that many of the witches were outwardly
religious according to the tenets of Christianity. So many Christian
priests were also followers of the witch-religion that the Inquisitors of
the sixteenth century were greatly exercised in their minds as to how to
deal with the offenders. Antide Colas confessed that she attended the
midnight mass on Christmas Eve, then went to a witch meeting, and returned
to the church in time for the mass at dawn on Christmas morning.[144] At
Ipswich in 1645 'Mother Lakeland hath been a professour of Religion, a
constant hearer of the Word for these many years, and yet a witch (as she
confessed) for the space of near twenty years'.[145] The best-known case
of the kind is that of Major Weir in Edinburgh in 1670, whose outward
appearance tallies with the usual descriptions of the Devil, and whose
conduct is only explainable on the supposition that he actually was the
Chief of the witches: 'His garb was still a cloak, and somewhat dark, and
he never went without his staff. He was a tall black man, and ordinarily
looked down to the ground; a grim countenance, and a big nose.'[146] His
reputation for piety was so great that a woman, who had actually seen him
commit an offence against the criminal law, was flogged for mentioning the
fact and thus defaming a man of such extreme and well-established piety. He
was tried as a witch on his own unsolicited confession, and was burnt
together with his staff, dying 'impenitent' and renouncing all hope of a
Christian heaven. The most interesting case historically, however, is that
of the Devil of the North Berwick witches (1590). The number of people
involved was thirty-nine, i.e. three Covens; but though the names of all
were known, only four were tried. The records are given in considerable
detail, and the identification of the Chief is therefore possible.

The character of the accused in this case is of great importance when
considering the evidence. Nothing more unlike the conventional idea of
witches can well be imagined than the man and women who were arraigned on
that occasion. Agnes Sampson, the wise wife of Keith, was 'a woman not of
the base and ignorant sort of Witches, but matron-like, grave and settled
in her answers, which were all to some purpose'. John Fian, or Cunynghame,
was a schoolmaster, therefore a man of education; Effie McCalyan, the
daughter of Lord Cliftonhall, was a woman of family and position; Barbara
Napier was also of good family. These were clearly the moving spirits of
the band, and they were all persons capable of understanding the meaning
and result of their actions.[147]

The accusation against the witches was that they had met together to plot
the murder of the King and Queen by witchcraft. The trial therefore was on
a double charge, witchcraft and high treason, and both charges had to be
substantiated. Keeping in mind Lord Coke's definition of a witch as 'a
person who has conference with the Devil to take counsel or to do some
act', it is clear that the fact of the Devil's bodily presence at the
meetings had to be proved first, then the fact of the 'conference', and
finally the attempts at murder. The reports of the trial do not, however,
differentiate these points in any way, and the religious prepossession of
the recorders colours every account. It is therefore necessary to take the
facts without the construction put upon them by the natural bias of the
Christian judges and writers. The records give in some detail the account
of several meetings where the deaths of the King and Queen were discussed,
and instructions given and carried out to effect that purpose. At each
meeting certain ceremonies proper to the presence of the Grand Master were
performed, but the real object of the meeting was never forgotten or even
obscured.

The actual evidence of the affair was given by Agnes Sampson (also called
Anny Simpson or Tompson), John Fian, Euphemia or Effie McCalyan, and
Barbara Napier. As it was a case of high treason, the two leaders, Sampson
and Fian, were tortured to force them to divulge the name of the prime
mover. Both these two and Effie McCalyan were condemned and executed;
Barbara Napier, equally guilty according to the evidence but more fortunate
in her jurors, was released; for which action the jurors themselves were
subsequently tried.

Though the means used by the witches may seem ridiculous, the murderous
intention is very clear. First they performed incantations to raise a storm
to wreck the Queen's ship on her way to Scotland, and the storm which
actually arose very nearly effected their purpose. As it failed, however,
they betook themselves to the accredited method of melting a waxen image,
but they were also ready to use poisons, which were to their minds the most
virulent that could be prepared.

I have arranged the evidence so as to make as far as possible a consecutive
narrative of the occurrences.

     _John Fian_, tried December 26, 1590. The first items relate to his
     consulting with the Devil and working witchcraft. 7. Item, Fylit, for
     the rasing of wyndis att the Kingis passing to Denmark, and for the
     sending of ane letter to Marioun Linkup in Leyth, to that effect,
     bidding hir to meit him and the rest, on the see, within fyve dayes;
     quhair Satan delyuerit ane catt out of his hand to Robert Griersoune,
     gevand the word to 'Cast the same in the see hola!': And thaireftir,
     being mountit in a schip, and drank ilk ane to otheris, quhair Satane
     said, 'ye shall sink the schip', lyke as thay thocht thay did. 8.
     Item, Fylit, for assembling him selff with Sathane, att the Kingis
     returning to Denmark; quhair Satan promeist to raise ane mist, and
     cast the Kingis Majestie in Ingland.

     _Agnes Sampson_, tried January 27, 1591. The first part of the dittay
     is entirely occupied with her conferences with the devil and her
     healing the sick by his advice. 40. Item, fylit and convict, of the
     delyuerie of ane letter, quhilk John Fiene, clerk, maid in George
     Mutis bak[e] hous in the Pannis, accumpaneit with the gudwyff of the
     hous, Gelie Duncan [and eight others], quha convenit thair for rasing
     of storme, to stay the Quene's hame cuming to Scotland; eftir
     consultatioun, quhether Gelie Duncan or Bessie Thomsoun wes meitest to
     send the letter with; and concludit to send the said Gelie, quhilk
     letter wes send to Marioun Lenchop in Leyth. The effect quhairoff is
     this: Marioun Lenchop, ye sall warne the rest of the sisteris, to
     raise the wind this day, att eleavin houris, to stay the Quenis cuming
     in Scotland. Lyke as they that wer convenit at the Pannis sould do
     their part be-eist; and to meit thame that wer in the Pannis; and att
     thair meting, thay sould mak the storme vniversall thro the see. [Then
     follows the method of doing this by casting in a cat.]

     [From _Newes from Scotland_.] The said Agnis Tompson (Sampson)
     confessed, that the Divell, being then at North Barrick Kirke
     attending their comming, in the habit or likenesse of a man ... and
     having made his ungodly exhortations, wherein he did greatly inveigh
     against the King of Scotland, he received their oathes for their good
     and true service towards him, and departed; which done, they returned
     to sea, and so home again. At which time, the witches demaunded of the
     Divell, 'why he did beare such hatred to the Kinge?' who aunswered,
     'By reason the King is the greatest enemie hee hath in the world.' All
     which their confessions and depositions are still extant upon record.

     _Barbara Napier_, tried May 8, 1591. Released. Assisors tried June 7,
     and acquitted. The said Barbara was accusit, that scho gaif hir
     presens, in the maist develisch and tressonabill Conventioune, haldin
     be hir and hir complices in the Divellis name, vpoune Lambmes-ewin
     last, att the New-heavin callit Aitchesounes-heavin, betuix
     Musselburcht and Prestonpannis, sin his Majestie come furth of
     Denmark; quhair war assemblit nyne principallis, to witt, Agnes
     Sampsoune, Jonett Straittoun, Ewfame McCalyeane, hir selff, Johne
     Fiene, Robert Griersoun, George Moitis wyffe in Prestoune, Margrett
     Thomsoune, and Donald Robesoune; quhilk is nyne persounes, the Devill,
     quha wes with thame in liknes of ane blak man, thocht maist meit to do
     the turne for the quhilk thay wer convenit; and thairfore, he sett
     thame nyne nerrest to him selff, in ane cumpany; and thay, togidder
     with the wyffe of Saltoune myle and the rest of the inferiouris, to
     the nowmer of threttie persounes, standand skairse the lenth of ane
     buird frae the foirsaid nyne persounes in ane vthir cumpany;[148]
     Agnes Sampsoune proponit the distructioune of his hienes persoune,
     saying to the Dewill, 'We haif ane turne ado, and we would fain be att
     itt gif we could, and thairfore help ws to itt'. The Dewill ansuerit,
     he sould do quhat he could, bott it wald be lang to, because it wald
     be thoirterit [thwarted], and he promeist to hir and thame ane pictour
     of walx, and ordenit hir and thame to hing, roist, and drop ane taid,
     and to lay the droppis of the taid [mixed with other supposedly
     virulent poisons], in his hienes way, quhair his Maiestie wald gang
     inowre or outowre, or in ony passage quhair itt mycht drop vpoun his
     hienes heid or body, for his hienes distructioune, that ane vther
     mycht haif rewlit in his Maiesties place, and the ward [government]
     mycht haif gane to the Dewill. Att the quhilk conventioune, his hienes
     name wes pronunceit in Latine; and Agnes Sampsoune wes appointit to
     mak the pictour and to gif it to the Devill to be inchantit, quhilk
     scho maid in deid, and gaif itt to him; and he promiseit to giff it to
     the said Barbara and to Effie McCalyan, att the nixt meting to be
     roistit. Margarett Thomsoun was appointit to dropp the taid. There wes
     ane appointit to seik sum of his hienes linning claithes, to do the
     turne with.

     _Agnes Sampson_, continued. Anny Sampsoun affirmed that sche, in
     company with nyn vthers witches, being convenit in the nycht besyd
     Prestounpannes, the deuell ther maister being present standing in the
     midis of thame; ther a body of wax, schaipen and maid be the said Anny
     Sampsoun, wrappit within a lynnyng claith, was fyrst delyuerit to the
     deuell; quhilk efter he had pronuncit his verde, delyuerit the said
     pictour to Anny Sampsoun, and sche to hir nyxt marrow, and sa euery
     ane round about, saying, 'This is King James the sext, ordonit to be
     consumed at the instance of a noble man Francis Erle Bodowell!'
     Efterwart again, at ther meting be nycht at the kirk of Northberick,
     wher the deuell, cled in a blak gown with a blak hat vpon his head,
     preachit vnto a gret nomber of them out of the pulpit, having lyk
     leicht candles rond about him. The effect of his language was till
     knaw, what skaith they had done, whow many they had won to ther
     oppinion sen their last meting, what succes the melting of the pictour
     had tane, and sic vain toyes. And because ane auld sely pure plowman,
     callit Grey Meill, chancit to say that 'nathing ailit the King yet,
     God be thankit' the deuell gaif him a gret blaw. Then dyuers amang
     them enterit in a raisonyng, maruelling that all ther deuellerie culd
     do na harm to the King, as it did till others dyuers. The deuell
     answerit, 'Il est vn home de Dieu'.[149]

     _Euphemia McCalyan_, tried June 9, 1591, executed (burnt alive) June
     25, 1591. Evidence was first given as to her practising witchcraft and
     consorting with well-known witches. Item, indyttit and accusit, of the
     conventicle had att North Berwick Kirk, tuentie dayes before
     Michelmas, 1590; and thair inquyring for the Kings pictour, gewin by
     Annie Sampsoun to the Dewill, to be inchantit, for the tressonabill
     distructioun of the King. Item, indyttit and accusit, for being att
     ane Conventioun haldin at the New Heaven callit the Fayrie-hoillis,
     att Lambmes last wes, to the effect immediatlie aboue writtin. Item,
     Indytit and accusit, for an Conventioun halden by yow and utheris
     notorious Wichis, youre associattis, att the Brwme-hoillis, quhair yow
     and thay tuik the sea, Robert Griersoun being your admerell and
     Maister-manne. [Then comes the recital of the magical means used to
     raise a tempest], quhairby the Quene wes putt back be storme. Item,
     Indytit, for consulting with the said Annie Sampsoun, Robert
     Griersoun, and diuers vtheris Wichis, for the tressonabill staying of
     the Quene's hame-cuming, be storme and wind; and rasing of storme, to
     that effect; or ellis to haif drownit hir Majestie and hir cumpany, be
     coniuring of cattis and casting of thame in the sea, at Leith, at the
     bak of Robert Griersounis hous.

     _Barbara Napier_, continued. And siclyke, the said Barbara was
     accusit, that sche gaif hir bodelie presens vpoun Alhallowewin last
     was, 1590 yeiris, to the frequent conuentioune haldin att the Kirk of
     North-Berwick, quhair sche dancit endlang the Kirk-yaird, and Gelie
     Duncan playit on ane trump, Johnne Fiene missellit [muffled] led the
     ring; Agnes Sampsoun and hir dochteris and all the rest following the
     said Barbara, to the nowmer of sevin scoir of persounes.... And the
     Devill start vp in the pulpett, lyke ane mekill blak man, haifand ane
     blak buik in his hand, callit on ewerie ane of thame, desyring thame
     all to be guid serwandis to him, and he sould be ane guid maister to
     thame. Robert Griersoun and Johne Fian stuid on his left hand; and the
     said Robert ffand grit fault with the Dewill, and cryit out, that all
     quhilkis wer besyd mycht heir, becaus his hienes pictour was nocht
     gewin thame, as wes promesit; the said Effie McCalyan remembrand and
     bid[d]and the said Robert Griersoun to speir for the pictour, meaning
     his Maiesties pictour, quhilk sould have been roistit. Robert
     Griersoun said thir wordis, 'Quhair is the thing ye promiseit?'
     meaning the pictour of walx, dewysit for roisting and vndoing his
     hienes persoune, quhilk Agnes Sampsoune gaif to him; and Robert cryit
     to 'haif the turne done'; yit his hienes name was nocht nameit, quhill
     thay that wer wemen nameit him; craifand in playne termes his hienes
     pictour. Bot he ansuerit, 'It sould be gottin the nixt meitting; and
     he wald hald the nixt assemblie for that caus the soner: It was nocht
     reddie at that tyme.' Robert Griersoune ansuerit, 'Ye promiseit twyis
     and begylit ws.' And four honest-like wemene wer very ernist and
     instant to haif itt. And the said Barbara and Effie McCalyane gatt
     than ane promeis of the Dewill, that his hienes pictour sould be
     gottin to thame twa, and that rycht sone: And this mater of his hienes
     pictour was the caus of that assemblie.

This ends the evidence of the witches; the point to be proved now is the
identity of the man whom they believed in and obeyed as God incarnate.

In all cases of murder or attempted murder it is necessary to find the
person who would benefit, for murder is differentiated from manslaughter by
the fact that it is deliberately planned and that it is done for a motive.
In the case of the witches of North Berwick, the man who instigated the
meetings, and to whom consequently suspicion points, was Francis Stewart
Earl of Bothwell. His position as regards both the King and the witches
must therefore be investigated.

Francis, afterwards Earl of Bothwell, was the eldest son of John Stewart
and Jane Hepburn, sister of that Earl of Bothwell whom Mary Queen of Scots
married. Francis succeeded his maternal uncle in title and estates. His
father, Lord John Stewart, was an illegitimate son of James V. The Pope,
however, legitimized all the natural children of James V; and Mary, after
her accession, granted letters of legitimation[150] to her two
half-brothers, John Stewart, and James, afterwards the Regent Moray. John
was slightly the elder of the two, and had he been legitimate would have
been the heir to the exclusion of Mary. The Regent Moray left only
daughters, whereas John Stewart had several sons, of whom Francis was the
eldest. Francis might therefore claim to be the next heir male to the
throne of Scotland, and possibly of England, had James VI died without
children. James's own opinion of the matter is shown in his speech to his
Parliament in 1592, when he denounced Bothwell as an aspirant to the
throne, although he was 'but a bastard, and could claim no title to the
crown'. Bothwell, however, was himself no bastard, though his father was.
But the significance of the witches' attempt, as well as the identity of
the chief personage at their meeting, is given in Barbara Napier's evidence
as to the reason for the attempted murder of the King, 'that another might
have ruled in his Majesty's place, and the government might have gone to
the Devil'. By changing the title 'the Devil' by which he was known to the
witches, to the title 'Earl of Bothwell' by which he was known outside the
community, the man and the motive are manifest. This hypothesis is borne
out by the contemporary accounts.

The trial of the witches created a great stir, and Bothwell's name was
freely coupled with the witches'. He denied all complicity; this was only
natural, as confession would have meant an acknowledgement of high treason.
But his followers might have betrayed him. The two leaders, Agnes Sampson
and John Fian, were tortured. Sampson admitted that the wax image was made
at the instance of Francis, Earl of Bothwell; an admission sufficiently
damning, but beyond that she would say nothing. The real danger to Bothwell
lay in Fian. Under torture he made admissions and signed a confession in
the presence of the King. He was then

     'by the maister of the prison committed to ward, and appointed to a
     chamber by himselfe; where, foresaking his wicked wayes, acknowledging
     his most ungodly lyfe, shewing that he had too much folowed the
     allurements and enticements of Sathan, and fondly practised his
     conclusions, by conjuring, witchcraft, inchantment, sorcerie, and such
     like, hee renounced the Devill and all his wicked workes, vowed to
     lead the lyfe of a Christian, and seemed newly converted to God. The
     morrow after, upon conference had with him, he granted that the Devill
     had appeared unto him in the night before, appareled all in blacke,
     with a white wande in his hande; and that the Devill demaunded of him,
     "If hee woulde continue his faithfull service, according to his first
     oath and promise made to that effect": Whome (as hee then saide) he
     utterly renounced to his face, and said unto him in this manner,
     "Avoide! Sathan, avoide! for I have listned too much unto thee, and by
     the same thou hast undone me; in respect whereof I utterly forsake
     thee". To whome the Devill answered, that "once ere thou die thou
     shalt bee mine". And with that (as he sayd) the Devill brake the white
     wand, and immediately vanished foorth of his sight. Thus, all the
     daie, this Doctor Fian continued verie solitarie, and seemed to have a
     care of his owne soule, and would call uppon God, showing himselfe
     penitent for his wicked life; neverthelesse, the same night, hee found
     such meanes that he stole the key of the prison doore and chamber in
     which he was, which in the night hee opened and fled awaie to the
     Saltpans, where hee was alwayes resident, and first apprehended. Of
     whose sodaine departure, when the Kings Majestie had intelligence, hee
     presently commanded diligent inquirie to bee made for his
     apprehension; and for the better effecting thereof hee sent publike
     proclamations into all partes of his lande to the same effect. By
     means of whose hot and harde pursuite he was agayn taken, and brought
     to prison; and then, being called before the Kings Highnes, hee was
     reexamined, as well touching his departure, as also touching all that
     had before happened. But this Doctor, notwithstanding that his owne
     confession appeareth, remaining in recorde under his owne hande
     writting, and the same thereunto fixed in the presence of the Kings
     Majestie and sundrie of his Councell, yet did hee utterly denie the
     same. Whereupon the Kings Majestie, perceiving his stubborne
     wilfulnesse, conceived and imagined, that in the time of his absence,
     hee had entered into newe conference and league with the Devill his
     maister'. [Fian was then subjected to the most horrible tortures that
     could be devised.] 'And notwithstanding all these grievous paines and
     cruel torments, hee would not confess anie thinges; so deeply had the
     Devill entered into his heart, that hee utterly denied all that which
     he before avouched; and would saie nothing thereunto, but this, that
     what hee had done and sayde before, was onely done and sayde, for fear
     of paynes which he had endured'.[151]

He continued steadfast and was executed at the Castle Hill.

The character of Fian is perfectly consistent. Under torture he signed a
confession, which confession might have implicated Bothwell. That night
Bothwell himself, or one of his emissaries, obtained access to the prisoner
and arranged for his escape. The wretched Fian was faced with death either
way; if he retracted his confession, he would die as a criminal by the
hands of the law; if he held to it, he would die as a traitor by the hands
of his comrades. There was no alternative. All that day he 'continued verie
solitarie', calling upon God, but by night he had made his choice and fled.
He apparently escaped without difficulty. The story of his stealing the
keys of his own cell and of the prison door is absurd; the escape was
obviously effected by connivance just as later on Bothwell's own escape was
effected. Fian went back to his own home, where, according to James's
surmise, he had an interview with the Devil (i.e. Bothwell), and there he
tamely waited till the officers of the law came and recaptured him. This
tameness is not in keeping with the rest of his character. A man with
sufficient courage and resource to get out of a strongly guarded prison
would have made good his escape; an easy enough matter in those turbulent
times. Fian then must have been retaken because he wished to be retaken.
For fear of torture and in hope of pardon he signed the first confession,
implicating Bothwell,[152] yet later he endured agonies of torture with the
certainty of death rather than acknowledge one word which might lead to the
discovery that James was bent upon. James's surmise was perhaps more than a
mere guess; it was prompted by his knowledge of the facts. Fian had had an
interview with his Master, whom he believed to be God Incarnate, and like
many a Christian martyr he atoned for the first betrayal by steadfast
courage through cruel torment even to death.

Reading the accounts in the light of this supposition, it is seen that
every one, including James, suspected Bothwell. Even if they did not
acknowledge his divinity, they feared the magical powers which, as Chief of
the Witches, he was supposed to wield. It is impossible to study the
details of this period without realizing the extraordinary fear which James
had of his cousin; it was fear with an underlying horror, totally different
from his feeling towards his other turbulent subjects. When Bothwell,
seeking pardon, was introduced into Holyrood Palace by Lady Athol in the
early morning of July 24, 1593, he entered the King's chamber. James,
always undignified, was caught in the middle of his morning toilet; he
tried to run into the Queen's room, but the way was barred by Bothwell's
friends and the door was locked. 'The king, seeing no other refuge, asked
what they meant. Came they to seek his life? let them take it--they would
not get his soul.'[153] This remark, made in the urgency and excitement of
the moment, is highly significant. Had Bothwell been, like many of James's
other enemies, merely an assassin, James would not have spoken of his soul.
But Bothwell as the Devil of the witches had the right to demand the
yielding of the soul, and James was aware of the fact.

The birth of James's children removed Bothwell's hopes of succession; the
power of the witch organization, of which he was the Chief, was broken by
the death of its leaders. He had made a strong bid for power, he failed,
fled the country, and finally died in poverty at Naples. There George
Sandys the traveller heard of him: 'Here a certaine _Calabrian_ hearing
that I was an _English_ man, came to me, and would needs perswade me that I
had insight in magicke: for that Earle _Bothel_ was my countryman, who
liues at _Naples_, and is in those parts famous for suspected
negromancie.'[154]

The Devil being actually a human being, the letter of introduction to him,
given by a man-witch to a would-be proselyte, becomes quite credible. It is
worth quoting verbatim:

     'Monseigneur, d'autant qu'il me faut retirer de la Religion des
     Chrestiens, afin que ie multiplie vostre party, duquel estant, il est
     raisonnable que ie vous glorifie et assemble tant de gens que ie
     pourray, ie vous enuoye ce porteur pour estre du nombre: c'est
     pourquoy ie vous prie de l'aider en ses amours.'

Satan's reply to the novice shows a distinctly human trace of temper:

     'Vous autres Chrestiens vous estes perfides et obstinez: Quand vous
     auez quelque violent desir, vous vous departez de vostre maistre, et
     auez recours √† moy: mais quand vostre desir est accompli, vous me
     tournez le dos comme √† vn ennemi, et vous en retournez √† vostre Dieu,
     lequel estant benin et clement, vous pardonne et re√ßoit volontiers.
     Mais fay moy vne promesse escrite et signee de ta main, par laquelle
     tu renonces volontairement ton Christ et ton Baptesme, et me promets
     que tu adhereras et seras auec moy iusqu'au iour du iugement; et apres
     iceluy tu te delecteras encore auec moy de souffrir les peines
     eternelles, et i'accompliray ton desir.'[155]