2. _The Esbat_

_Business._--The Esbat differed from the Sabbath by being primarily for
business, whereas the Sabbath was purely religious. In both, feasting and
dancing brought the proceedings to a close. The business carried on at the
Esbat was usually the practice of magic for the benefit of a client or for
the harming of an enemy. Sometimes the Devil appears to have ordered his
followers to perform some action by which to impress the imagination of
those who believed in his power though they did not worship him. Very often
also the Esbat was for sheer enjoyment only, without any ulterior object,
as the following quotations show:

Estebène de Cambrue (1567), who is the authority for the name Esbat as
applied to local meetings, says that 'les petites assemblées qui se font
pres des villes ou parroisses, où il n'y va que ceux du lieu, ils les
appellent les esbats: & se font ores en vn lieu de ladicte paroisse, ores
en vn autre, où on ne faict que sauter & folastrer, le Diable n'y estant
auec tout son grand arroy comme aux grandes assemblees'.[407] Alesoun
Peirsoun (1588) was taken by a party of men and women, under the leadership
of a man in green, 'fordir nor scho could tell; and saw with thame pypeing
and mirrynes and gude scheir, and wes careit to Lowtheane, and saw wyne
punchounis with tassis with them'.[408] Jonet Barker (1643) said that 'scho
and ye said Margaret Lauder being w^{t}hin ye said Jonet Cranstones house
tua pyntis of beir war drukkin be thame thre togidder in ye said house at
quhilk ye devill appeirit to thame in ye liknes of ane tryme gentill man
and drank w^t thame all thre and that he Imbracet the said margaret lauder
in his armes at ye drinking of ye beir and put his arme about hir
waist'.[409] Isobel Bairdie (1649) was accused of meeting the Devil and
drinking with him, 'the devil drank to her, and she pledging him, drank
back again to him, and he pledged her, saying, _Grammercie, you are very
welcome_.'[410] Janet Brown (1649) 'was charged with having held a meeting
with the Devil appearing as a man, at the back of Broomhills, who was _at a
wanton play_ with Isobel Gairdner the elder, and Janet Thomson'.[411] In
Forfar Helen Guthrie (1661) confessed that she went to several meetings; at
one in the churchyard 'they daunced togither, and the ground under them wes
all fyre flauchter, and Andrew Watson hade his vsuale staff in his hand,
altho he be a blind man yet he daunced alse nimblie as any of the companye,
and made also great miriement by singing his old ballads, and that Isobell
Shyrrie did sing her song called Tinkletum Tankletum; and that the divill
kist every one of the women'. At another meeting 'they all daunced togither
a whyle, and then went to Mary Rynd's house and sat doune together at the
table ... and made them selfes mirrie; and the divell made much of them
all, but especiallie of Mary Rynd, and he kist them all'.[412] Elspet Bruce
of the same Coven, 'by turning the sive and sheires, reased the divell, who
being werry hard to be laid againe, ther wes a meiting of witches for
laying of him ... and at this meiting they had pipe-music and
dauncing'.[413] Isobell Gowdie (1662) gives an account of one of these
joyous assemblies: 'We killed an ox, in Burgie, abowt the dawing of the
day, and we browght the ox with ws hom to Aulderne, and did eat all amongst
ws, in an hows in Aulderne, and feasted on it.'[414] Marie Lamont (1662)
also enjoyed her meetings; the first at which she was present was held in
Kettie Scott's house, where the devil 'sung to them, and they dancit; he
gave them wyn to drink, and wheat bread to eat, and they warr all very
mirrie. She confesses, at that meiting the said Kettie Scott made her first
acquaintance with the devill, and caused her to drink to him, and shak
hands with him.--Shee was with Katie Scot and others at a meitting at
Kempoch, wher they danced, and the devil kissed them when they went
away.'[415] Annaple Thomson and the other witches of Borrowstowness
(1679)--

     'wis at several mettings with the devill in the linkes of
     Borrowstonenes, and in the howsse of you Bessie Vickar, and ye did
     eatt and drink with the devill, and with on another, and with witches
     in hir howss in the night tyme; and the devill and the said Wm Craw
     browght the ale which ye drank, extending to about sevin gallons, from
     the howss of Elizabeth Hamilton; and yow the said Annaple had ane
     other metting abowt fyve wekes ago, when yow wis goeing to the
     coalhill of Grange, and he inveitted you to go alongst, and drink with
     him.... And yow the said Margret Hamilton has bein the devill's
     servant these eight or nyne yeeres bygane; and he appered and
     conversed with yow at the town-well at Borrowstownes, and several
     tymes in yowr awin howss, and drank severall choppens of ale with
     you.'[416]

The magical ceremonies performed by the witches with the help of the Devil
were usually for the destruction of, or for doing harm to, an enemy.
Sometimes, however, the spells were originally for the promotion of
fertility, but were misunderstood by the recorders and probably by the
witches themselves. Alexia Violaea (1589) said that 'nachdem sie were mit
ihren Gespielen umb und umb gelauffen eine ziemliche gut Weile, habe sie
pflegen in die Höhe über sich zu werffen ein reines subtiles Pulverlein,
welches ihr der Teuffel darzu gegeben habe, darvon Raupen, Käffern,
Heuschrecken, und dergleichen andere Beschädigung mehr, so Hauffenweise
wüchsen, dass die Acker darmit in einem Augenblick überall beschmeist
würden'.[417] Isobel Gowdie's magical charm (1662) seems to come under this
category:

     'We went be-east Kinlosse, and ther we yoaked an plewghe of paddokis.
     The Devill held the plewgh, and Johne Yownge in Mebestowne, our
     Officer, did drywe the plewghe. Paddokis did draw the plewgh, as oxen;
     qwickens wer sowmes, a riglen's horne wes a cowter, and an piece of an
     riglen's horne wes an sok. We went two seuerall tymes abowt; and all
     we of the Coven went still wp and downe with the plewghe, prayeing to
     the Divell for the fruit of that land.'[418]

The greater number of meetings were occupied with business of a magical
character with the intention of harming certain specified persons; though
any other kind of business was also transacted. The North Berwick witches
opened the graves which the Devil indicated in order to obtain the means of
making charms with dead men's bones; on another occasion they attempted to
wreck a ship by magic.[419] The Lang Niddry witches (1608) went to the
house of Beigis Tod, where they drank, and there christened a cat.[420] The
Lancashire witches (1613) met at Malking Tower for two purposes; the first
was to give a name to the familiar of Alison Device, which could not be
done as she was not present, being then in prison; the second was to
arrange a scheme or plot for the release of Mother Demdike, the principal
witch of the community, then a prisoner in Lancaster Castle; the plot
involved the killing of the gaoler and governor, and the blowing up of the
castle.[421] In 1630 Alexander Hamilton was tried in Edinburgh,

     'the said Alexr Hamiltoun haifing concaivet ane deidlie haitrent
     agains umqle Elizabeth Lausone Lady Ormestoun younger becaus the said
     Alexr being at her zet asking for almous she choisit him therfra
     saying to him "away custroun carle ye will get nothing heir". The said
     Alexr therupon in revenge therof accompaneit wt tua wemen mentionet in
     his depostiones come to Saltoun woid quhair he raisit the devill and
     quha appeirit to him and his associattis in the likenes of ane man
     cled in gray and the said Alexr and his associattis haifing schawin to
     him the caus of thair coming desyring him to schaw to thame be quhat
     meanes thay micht be revendget upon the said Lady.'[422]

Margaret Johnson (1633) deposed that she was not at the great witch-meeting
on All Saints' Day, but was at a smaller meeting the Sunday after, 'where
there was, at yt tyme, between 30 and 40 witches, who did all ride to the
said meetinge, and the end of theire said meeting was to consult for the
killinge and hurtinge of men and beasts.'[423] The Forfar witches (1661)
claimed to have wrecked a ship.[424] Isobel Gowdie (1662) is as usual very
dramatic in her account; on one occasion the witches met to make a charm
against the minister of Auldearne, Mr. Harie Forbes: 'Satan wes with ws and
learned ws the wordis to say thryse ower. Quhan we haid learned all thes
wordis from the Divell, we fell all down wpon owr kneis, with owr hear down
ower owr showlderis and eyes, and owr handis lifted wp, and owr eyes
stedfastlie fixed wpon the Divell; and said the forsaidis wordis thryse
ower to the Divell, striktlie, against Maister Harie Forbes his recowering
from the said seiknes.' When making an image only a few of the witches were
present with the Devil.[425] Marie Lamont (1662) claimed that her Coven
raised storms on two occasions; and on a third, they in the likeness of
'kats', and the Devil as a man with cloven feet, made a charm with 'wyt
sand' against Blackhall younger and Mr. John Hamilton.[426] Amongst the
most detailed accounts of the wax or clay images, and of the ritual for
killing the person whom the image represented, are those of the Somerset
witches[427] (1664). The baptism of the figure is an interesting point. The
Paisley witches (1678) had a meeting to make a clay figure in order to kill
an enemy of the witch in whose house the meeting was held.[428] At
Borrowstowness part of the accusation was that 'ye and ilk ane of yow was
at ane metting with the devill and other witches at the croce of Murestane,
upon the threttein of October last, where you all danced and the devill
acted the pyiper, and where yow indewored to have destroyed Andrew
Mitchell.'[429] In New England the witches accused George Burroughs 'that
he brought Poppets to them, and Thorns to stick into those Poppets'.[430]

At the Esbats it is also evident that the Devil wished to maintain an
appearance of miraculous power not only before the world at large, but in
the eyes of the witches as well. This will account for the meetings on the
sea-shore in raging storms when vessels were liable to be wrecked, and
there are also many indications that the destruction of an enemy was
effected by means more certain than the making and pricking of a wax or
clay figure, means which were used after the figure had been made. Some of
the methods of maintaining this prestige are of the simplest, others are
noted without any explanation: 'Satan faict en ce lieu [le Sabbat] tant de
choses estrãges & nouuelles que leur simplicité & abus prend cela pour
quelques miracles.'[431] At Forfar (1661) the means of obtaining the result
are apparent; during a great storm the Devil and the witches destroyed the
bridge of Cortaquhie, and the destruction was so arranged as to appear to
have been effected by magical power; but Helen Guthrie confessed that 'they
went to the bridge of Cortaquhie with intentione to pull it doune, and that
for this end shee her selfe, Jonnet Stout, and others of them, did thrust
ther shoulderis againest the bridge, and that the divell wes bussie among
them acting his pairt'. Issobell Smyth, who also assisted on the occasion,
said, 'Wee all rewed that meitting, for wee hurt our selves lifting.'[432]
Still more simple was the method of destroying the harvest of a field at
Crook of Devon, where Bessie Henderson 'confessed and declared that Janet
Paton was with you at ane meeting when they trampit down Thos. White's rie
in the beginning of harvest, 1661, and that she had broad soales and
trampit down more nor any of the rest'.[433] The Devil of Mohra in Sweden
cared only to impress his followers; when the wall which they were building
fell down 'some of the Witches are commonly hurt, which makes him laugh,
but presently he cures them again'.[434]

_Site._--In some places the Esbat was held at a fixed site, in others the
site varied from week to week. In both cases, the locality was always in
the near neighbourhood of the village whose inhabitants attended the
meeting.

     'Pour le lieu ordinaire c'est és carrefours, co[~m]e disoit Isaac de
     Queyran, qui deposoit y auoir esté au carrefour du Palays Galienne,
     près la ville de Bourdeaux; ou aux places des paroisses au deuant des
     Eglises, & le plus souuent au droict de la grand' porte, si l'Eglise
     est plantée au milieu de la place comme elle est souuent, afin que le
     Diable plante sa chaire tout vis à vis du grand autel où on met le
     Sainct sacrement: comme il est en la place d'Ascain, où tous les
     tesmoins du lieu, nous ont dict que le Sabbat se faisoit. Il a aussi
     accoustumé les tenir en quelque lieu desert, & sauuage, comme au
     milieu d'vne lande; & encore en lieu du tout hors de passage, de
     voisinage, d'habitation, & de rencontre: Et communement ils
     s'appellent Aquelarre[435] qui signifie Lane de Bouc, comme qui diroit
     la lane ou lãde, où le Bouc conuoque ses assemblées.'[436]

Danaeus emphasizes the variation of both site and date: 'They meete
togither in certen apointed places, not al of them togither, nor at once,
but certen of them whom he pleaseth to call, so that he apointeth where
they shall meete, and at what houre of the day, or of the nighte.'[437] The
Windsor witches, however, 'did accustome to meete within the backeside of
Maister Dodges in the Pittes there'.[438] Boguet's evidence also points to
there being a settled site for the Esbat in each village:

     'Les Sorciers du costé de Longchamois s'assembloient en vn pré, qui
     est sur le grand chemin tirant à S. Claude, où l'on voit les ruines
     d'vne maison. Ceux du costé de Coirieres tenoient leur Sabbat, sous le
     village de Coirieres proche l'eau, en vn lieu appellé és Combes, qui
     est du tout sans chemin. [Autres] se retrouuoient en vn lieu dict és
     Fontenelles, sous le village de Nezan, qui est vn lieu assez
     descouuert ... le Sabbat des Sorciers de la Moüille se tenoit en la
     Cour du Prioré du mesme lieu.'[439]

Jane Bosdeau (1594) went twice a week regularly to 'a Rendezvous of above
Sixty Witches at Puy de dome'.[440] And the Swedish witches went so
uniformly to one place that there was a special building for their rites:

     'They unanimously confessed that _Blockula_ is scituated in a delicate
     large Meadow whereof you can see no end. The place or house they met
     at, had before it a Gate painted with divers colours; through this
     Gate they went into a little Meadow distinct from the other.... In a
     huge large Room of this House, they said, there stood a very long
     Table, at which the Witches did sit down: And that hard by this Room
     was another Chamber where there were very lovely and delicate
     Beds.'[441]

On the whole, the weight of evidence in England and Scotland is in favour
of Danaeus's statement that there was no fixed site, though this should be
taken as referring to the local meetings only, not to the Great Assemblies.
The Forfar witch-trials give much information: Helen Guthrie

     'wes at a meitting in the church yeard of Forfar in the Holfe
     therof.... Betwixt the oatseid and the bearseid [barleysowing], she
     wes at ane other meitting at the Pavilione hollis.... This same year,
     betwixt the oatseid and bearseid, she was at a thrid meiting in the
     church yeard of Forfar in the holfe thereof, about the same tyme of
     the night as at the [former] meitings, viz. at midnight.--About the
     beginning of the last oat seid tyme, Isabell Syrie did cary hir
     [Jonet Howat] to the Insch within the loch of Forfar, shoe saw at this
     tyme, about threteen witches with the divill, and they daunced
     togither.... About four wiekes after the forsaid meiting in the Insch,
     the said Isabell Syrie caried hir to ane other meiting at
     Muryknowes.--About three and a halfe yeares since, she [Elspet
     Alexander] was at a meiting with the divill at Peterden, midway
     betwixt Forfar and Dondie.... About four wiekes after this mieting at
     Petterden, shoe was at ane second mieting at the Muryknowes ... shoe
     was present at ane thrid mieting near Kerymure.'[442]

Isobel Gowdie's evidence is detailed as usual: 'The last tyme that owr
Coven met, we, and an vther Coven, wer dauncing at the Hill of Earlseat;
and befor that, betwixt Moynes and Bowgholl; and befor that we ves beyond
the Meikleburne; and the vther Coven being at the Downie-hillis we went
from beyond the Meikle-burne, and went besyd them, to the howssis at the
Wood-end of Inshoch.... Befor Candlemas, we went be-east Kinlosse.'[443]
The same facts were elicited from the Kinross-shire witches; Robert Wilson
'confessed ye had ane meeting with the Devill at the Stanriegate, bewest
the Cruick of Devon ... the Devil appointed them to meet at the Bents of
Balruddrie'.--Margaret Huggon confessed 'that ye was at another meeting
with Sathan at the Stanriegate, bewest the Cruik of Devon ... lykeways ye
confessed ye was at another meeting with Satan at the Heathrie Knowe
be-east the Cruik of Devon, where the Gallows stands ... a meeting at the
back of Knocktinnie at the Gaitside ... and another at the bents of
Newbiggin'.--Janet Brugh 'confessed that ye was at ane meeting at
Stanriegate ... ye confessed that about Yule last bypast ye was at ane
meeting with Sathan at Turfhills ... lykeways ye confessed that ye was at
the Bents of Balruddrie and Gibson's Craig, where Sathan was present at
them both'.--Christian Grieve 'freely confessed that ye was at ane meeting
with Sathan at the back of Andrew Dowie his house'.[444] The Somerset
witches (1664) varied in this respect. Those of Wincanton met in different
places: Elizabeth Style 'hath been at several general meetings in the night
at High Common, and a Common near _Motcombe_, at a place near _Marnhull_,
and at other places'.--Alice Duke 'hath been at several meetings in Lie
Common, and other places in the night'. But the Brewham Coven appear to
have met commonly at Hussey's Knap in Brewham Forest.[445]

Occasionally a reason is given for the change of site. 'Parfois vn Sabbat
finy à vn coin de paroisse, on s'en va le tenir à vne autre, où le Diable
mene les mesmes personnes: mais là, on y en rencontre d'autres'.[446]
Sometimes also a sidelight is thrown upon these gatherings, which explains
the fact that in many cases the witches said that they did not know all the
people present at a given meeting:

     'Antoine Tornier, Et Iaquema Paget ont confessé, que comme elles
     retournoient à certain iour par ensemble de glanner, passans au long
     du [=p]ré de Longchamois, elles apperçeurent que l'on y tenoit le
     Sabbat; Surquoy elles poserent bas leurs fardeaux, & allerent au lieu
     predict, où elles firent comme les autres, & puis se retirerent
     chacune en leurs maisons, apres auoir reprins leurs fardeaux.'[447]

The Salem Witches (1692) met 'upon a plain grassy place, by which was a
Cart path and sandy ground in the path, in which were the tracks of Horses
feet'.[448]

_Date and Hour._--There was no fixed day or hour for the Esbat, and in this
it differed from the Sabbath, which was always at night. The Devil let his
followers know the time, either by going to them himself or by sending a
message by the officer. The message might be by word of mouth, or by some
signal understood by the initiated.

Though there was no fixed day for the Esbat, it seems probable that one day
in the week was observed in each locality.

Danaeus, in his general survey of the cult in 1575, says: 'He apointeth
where they shall meete, and at what houre of the day, or of the night:
wherein they haue no surenes, nor certentie. For these meetinges are not
weekely, nor monthly, nor yeerely, but when and how often it shall seeme
good to this their maister. And many times himself warneth them to meete,
sometimes hee apoynteth others to warne them in his staede. But when he
doth it himself, he appeareth vnto them in likenesse of a man.'[449] De
Lancre says that in the Basses-Pyrénées 'le lieu où on le trouue
ordinairement s'appelle Lanne de bouc, & en Basque _Aquelarre de verros,
prado del Cabron_, & là les Sorciers le vont adorer trois nuicts durant,
celle du Lundy, du Mercredy, & du Vendredy.--Les iours ordinaires de la
conuocation du Sabbat, ou pour mieux dire les nuicts, sont celles du
Mercredy venant au Ieudy, & du Vendredy venant au Samedy.--Catherine de
Naguille de la paroisse d'Vstarits, aagee de onze ans, & sa compagne, nous
out asseuré qu'elles auoi[~e]t esté au Sabbat en plein midy.'[450] Jane
Bosdeau (1594) 'every Wednesday and Friday met a Rendezvous of aboue Sixty
Witches at Puy de dome'.[451] Boguet says that the day of the Sabbath was
variable, usually Thursday night;[452] while, according to Bodin, the most
frequent was 'entre la nuict du Lundi & Mardi'.[453] Boguet also goes on to
say, 'Le Sabbat ne se tient pas tousiours de nuict, ains que les Sorciers y
vont aussi quelquefois de iour, selon que firent Antoine Tornier, & Iaquema
Paget, & plusieurs autres de leur secte le confessent.'[454] The Lorraine
witches also had the same custom:

     'Alle zugleich, so viel ihrer bisher in Lotharingen peinlich sind
     verhöret worden, bekandten, dass solche Versammlung in keiner andern
     Nacht, als welche zu nechst vor dem Donnerstag oder Sambstag hergehet,
     gehalten werden.--Johannes a Villa und Agathina des Schneiders
     Francisci weib, sagt, eine oder zwey Stunde vor Mitternacht, were die
     bequemste Zeit darzu, und zwar nicht allein zu diesen Gespensten,
     sondern auch sonsten zu allerhand Gespensten, Bollergeisten,
     Irrgeisten, &c. Aber die Stunde nach Mitternacht diene nicht
     darzu.'[455]

The English and Scotch evidence is to the same effect. The witches 'are
likewise reported to have each of them a Spirit or Imp attending on, or
assigned to them.... These give the Witches notice to be ready on all
Solemn appointments, and meetings, which are ordinarily on Tuesday or
Wednesday night'.[456] Janet Breadheid of the Auldearne Coven emphasizes
the irregularity of the dates: 'Efter that, we vold still meit euerie ten,
twelve, or twantie dayes continwally.'[457] Marie Lamont merely notes that
the meetings were at night: 'The devil came to Kattrein Scott's house in
the midst of the night.... When she had been at a mietting sine Zowle last,
with other witches, in the night, the devill convoyed her home in the
dawing.'[458] The Somerset witches had no special night: 'At every meeting
before the Spirit vanisheth away, he appoints the next meeting place and
time,'[459] and Mary Green went to a meeting 'on Thursday Night before
Whitsunday last.'[460] At Paisley the meeting was on Thursday, the 4th of
January, 1678, in the night, in John Stuart's house.[461] The Swedish
witches were much harder worked: 'whereas formerly one journey a week would
serve his turn, from their own Town to the place aforesaid, now they were
forced to run to other Towns and places for Children, and that some of them
did bring with them some fifteen, some sixteen Children every night.'[462]

The more modern examples suggest that the date became more fixed: 'On croit
que c'est toujours un vendredi soir que les sorciers et sorcières se
réunissent.'[463] 'Sorciers et sorcières vont au _sabbat_ le vendredi, à
travers les airs.'[464]