4. _As an Animal_

[Illustration]

In many religions the disguising of the principal personage--whether god or
priest--as an animal is well known. The custom is very ancient--such
disguised human beings are found even among the palaeolithic drawings in
France; and on a slate palette belonging to the late pre-dynastic period of
Egypt there is a representation of a man disguised as a jackal and playing
on a pipe.[156] The ritual disguise as an animal is condemned, with great
particularity, as devilish, in the _Liber Poenitentialis_ of Theodore of
the seventh century (see _supra_, p. 21), showing that it continued in
force after the conversion of England to an outward appearance of
Christianity. From the analogy of other religions in which the custom
occurs, it would appear that it is a ritual for the promotion of fertility;
the animal represented being either the sacred animal of the tribe or the
creature most used for food.

The suggestion that the Devil was a man, wearing either an animal's skin or
a mask in the form of an animal's head as a ritual disguise, accounts as
nothing else can for the witches' evidence as to his appearance and his
changes of form. A confusion, however, exists from the fact that the
witches, and therefore the recorders, usually spoke of the familiars as the
Devil; but in almost every case the disguised man can, on examination of
the evidence, be distinguished from the animal familiar.

The animal forms in which the Devil most commonly appeared were bull, cat,
dog, goat, horse, and sheep. A few curious facts come to light on
tabulating these forms; i.e. the Devil appears as a goat or a sheep in
France only; he is never found in any country as a hare, though this was
the traditional form for a witch to assume; nor is he found as a toad,
though this was a common form for the familiar; the fox and the ass also
are unknown forms; and in Western Europe the pig is an animal almost
entirely absent from all the rites and ceremonies as well as from the
disguises of the Devil.

The witches never admitted in so many words that the Devil was a man
disguised, but their evidence points strongly to the fact. In some cases
the whole body was disguised, in others a mask was worn, usually over the
face. The wearing of the mask is indicated partly by descriptions of its
appearance, and partly by the description of the Devil's voice. The
Lorraine witches in 1589 said that the Devils 'können nimmermehr die
Menschliche Stimme so aussdrücklich nachreden, dass man nicht leicht daran
mercke, dass es eine gemachte falsche Stimme sey. Nicolaea Ganatia, und
fast alle andere sagen, dass sie eine Stimme von sich geben, gleich denen,
so den Kopff in ein Fass oder zerbrochenen Hafen stecken und daraus reden.
Auch geben sie etwann eine kleine leise Stimme von sich.'[157] The North
Berwick Devil in 1590 was purposely disguised out of all recognition: 'The
Devil start up in the pulpit, like a mickle black man, with a black beard
sticking out like a goat's beard; and a high ribbed nose, falling down
sharp like the beak of a hawk; with a long rumpill' [tail].[158] This was
Barbara Napier's account; Agnes Sampson describes the same personage, 'The
deuell caused all the company to com and kiss his ers, quhilk they said was
cauld like yce; his body was hard lyk yrn, as they thocht that handled him;
his faice was terrible, his noise lyk the bek of an egle, gret bournyng
eyn: his handis and legis wer herry, with clawis vpon his handis and feit
lyk the griffon, and spak with a how voice.'[159] Boguet states that 'on
demanda à George Gandillon, si lors qu'il fut sollicité par Satã de se
bailler à luy, Satan parloit distinctement. Il respondit que non, & qu'à
peine pouuoit il comprendre ce qu'il disoit.'[160] The evidence of the
witches in the Basses-Pyrénées makes it clear that a disguise was worn, and
that a mask was placed on the back either of the head or of the person;
this also explains part of Agnes Sampson's evidence given above. The effect
of the mask at the back of the head was to make the man appear two-faced,
'comme le dieu Janus'. In the other case 'le diable estoit en forme de
bouc, ayant vne queue, & au-dessoubs vn visage d'homme noir ... & n'a
parole par ce visage de derriere.--Vne grande queüe au derriere, & vne
forme de visage au dessoubs: duquel visage il ne profere aucune parole,
ains luy sert pour donner à baiser à ceux qui bon luy semble.--Marie
d'Aspilecute dit qu'elle le baisa à ce visage de derriere au dessoubs d'vne
grande queuë; qu'elle l'y a baisé par trois fois, & qu'il auoit ce visage
faict comme le museau d'vn bouc.--Bertrand de Handuch, aagee de dix ans,
confessa que le cul du grãd maistre auoit vn visage derriere, & c'estoit le
visage de derriere qu'on baisoit, & non le cul.'[161] The Devil of the
Basses-Pyrénées evidently wore a mask over the face, for he had 'la voix
effroyable & sans ton, quand il parle on diroit que cest vn mullet qui se
met à braire, il a la voix casse, la parole malarticulee, & peu
intelligible, parcequ'il a tousiours la voix triste & enroüee'. On
occasions also 'il quitoit la forme de Bouc, & prenoit celle d'homme'.[162]
In 1614 at Orleans Silvain Nevillon said 'qu'il vit à la cheminée vn homme
noir duquel on ne voyoit pas la teste. Vit aussi vn grand homme noir à
l'opposite de celuy de la cheminée, & que ledit ho[~m]e noir parloit comme
si la voix fut sortie d'vn poinson. Dit: Que le Diable dit le Sermõ au
Sabbat, mais qu'on n'entend ce qu'il dit, parce qu'il parle co[~m]e en
grõdant.'[163] The devil who appeared to Joan Wallis, the Huntingdonshire
witch, in 1649, was in the shape of a man dressed in black, but he 'was not
as her husband, which speaks to her like a man, but he as he had been some
distance from her when he was with her'.[164] Thomazine Ratcliffe, a
Suffolk witch, said that the Devil 'spoke with a hollow, shrill
voyce'.[165] According to Mary Green (1665) the Somerset Devil, who was a
little man, 'put his hand to his Hat, saying, How do ye? speaking low but
big'.[166] In the same year Abre Grinset, another Suffolk witch, confessed
that she met the Devil, who was in the form of 'a Pretty handsom Young Man,
and spake to her with a hollow Solemn Voice'.[167] John Stuart at Paisley
(1678) said the Devil came to him as a black man, 'and that the black man's
Apparel was black; and that the black man's Voice was hough and
goustie'.[168]

The coldness of the devil's entire person, which is vouched for by several
witches, suggests that the ritual disguise was not merely a mask over the
face, but included a covering, possibly of leather or some other hard and
cold substance, over the whole body and even the hands. Such a disguise was
apparently not always worn, for in the great majority of cases there is no
record of the Devil's temperature except in the sexual rites, and even then
the witch could not always say whether the touch of the Devil was warm or
not. In 1565 the Belgian witch, Digna Robert, said the devil 'était froid
dans tous ses membres'.[169] In 1590, at North Berwick, 'he caused all the
company to com and kiss his ers, quhilk they said was cauld lyk yce; his
body was hard lyk yrn, as they thocht that handled him'.[170] In 1598
Pierre Burgot, whose statement is quoted by several authors, 'a confessé,
que le Diable luy donna à baiser sa main senestre, qui estoit noire, comme
morte, & toute froide'.[171] In 1609, in the Basses-Pyrénées, Isaac de
Queyran, aged 25, said that he and others 'le baiserent à vne fesse qui
estoit blanche & rouge, & auoit la forme d'vne grande cuisse d'vn homme, &
estoit velue'.[172] This shows the ritual disguise of the person and
suggests the use of an animal's hide with the hair still attached. In 1645
the Essex witch Rebecca West said 'he kissed her, but was as cold as
clay'.[173] At Salisbury in 1653, when the witch Anne Bodenham persuaded
Anne Styles to join the community, 'then appeared two Spirits in the
likenesse of great Boyes, with long shagged black hair, and stood by her
looking over her shoulder, and the Witch took the Maids forefinger of her
right hand, and pricked it with a pin, and squeezed out the blood and put
it into a Pen, and put the Pen in the Maids hand, and held her hand to
write in a great book, and one of the Spirits laid his hand or Claw upon
the Witches whilest the Maid wrote; and the Spirits hand did feel cold to
the Maid as it touched her hand, when the witches hand and hers were
together writing'.[174] At Forfar in 1661 three of the witches agreed as to
the coldness of the Devil; 'Elspet Alexander confesses that the divill
kissed hir selfe that night and that it was ane cold kisse; Katheren Porter
confesseth that the divill tooke hir by the hand, that his hand was cold;
Isobell Smith confessed that he kissed hir and his mouth and breath were
cold.'[175] In 1662 the Crook of Devon witches were also in accord. Isabel
Rutherford 'confesst that ye was at ane meeting at Turfhills, where Sathan
took you by the hand and said "welcome, Isabel", and said that his hand was
cold.--Margaret Litster confessed that Sathan took you be the hand and
stayed the space of half an hour, Sathan having grey clothes and his hand
cold.--Janet Paton confessed that Sathan asked you gif ye would be his
servant, whilk ye did, and Sathan took you be the hand, and ye said that
his hand was cold.' On the other hand Agnes Murie 'knew not whether his
body was hot or cold'.[176] According to Isobel Gowdie at Auldearne in
1662, 'he was a meikle blak roch man, werie cold';[177] at Torryburn,
Lilias Adie found his skin was cold;[178] and the Crighton witches in 1678
said, 'he was cold, and his breath was like a damp air'.[179] In 1697
little Thomas Lindsay declared that 'Jean Fulton his Grand-mother awaked
him one Night out of his Bed, and caused him take a Black Grimm Gentleman
(as she called him) by the Hand; which he felt to be cold'.[180]

The evidence as to the forms assumed by the Devil is tabulated here under
each animal, each section being arranged in chronological order.

1. _Bull._--In 1593 at Angers 'Michel des Rousseaux, agé de 50 ans, dict
que ledict homme noir appellé Iupin se transforma aussitost en Bouc ... et
apres leur auoir baillé des boüetes de poudre, il se trãsforma en
Bouuard'.[181] At Aberdeen in 1597 Marion Grant confessed that 'the Devill
apperit to the, sumtyme in the scheap of a beist, and sumtyme in the scheap
of a man'. Jonet Lucas of the same Coven said that the Devil was with them,
'beand in likenes of ane beist'. Agnes Wobster, also of the same Coven,
acknowledged that 'thaireftir Satan apperit to the in the likenes of a
calff, and spak to the in manner forsaid, and baid the be a gude servand to
him'.[182] In 1608 Gabriel Pellé confessed that he went with a friend to
the Sabbath, where 'le Diable estoit en vache noire, & que cette vache
noire luy fit renoncer Dieu'.[183] De Lancre says that at Tournelle the
Devil appeared 'parfois comme vn grand B[oe]uf d'airain couché à terre,
comme vn B[oe]uf naturel qui se repose'.[184] At Lille in 1661 the witches
'adored a beast with which they committed infamous things'.[185] According
to Isobel Gowdie in 1662, the Devil of Auldearne changed his form, or
disguise, continually, 'somtym he vold be lyk a stirk, a bull, a deir, a
rae, or a dowg'.[186] [In the above, I have taken the word 'beast' in its
usual meaning as an animal of the cattle tribe, but it is quite possible
that the Lille beast, _beste_ in the original, may have been a goat and not
a bull. This seems likely from the fact that the sacrifice was by fire as
in the other places where the Devil used the goat-disguise.]

2. _Cat._--The earliest example of the cat-disguise is in the trial of the
Guernsey witches in 1563, when Martin Tulouff confessed:

     '[*q] il y a viron ung quartier d'an passez [*q] il soy trouva
     auvec[*q]s la Vieillesse aultrem[~e]t dit Collenette Gascoing, en la
     rue de la fosse au Coully, là ou l y avoet chinq ou vi chatz, d'ou il
     y en avoet ung qui estoet noir, qui menoit la dance, et danssoient et
     luy dyst lad^te Collenette, [*q] il besait led^t Chat et d^t [*q] il
     estoet sur ses pieds plat, et que ladite Collenette le besa [*p] de
     derriere, et luy [*p] la crysse, et [*q] frãcoize Lenouff sa mère y
     estoet et Collette Salmon fae de Collas du port, laqlle alloet devãt
     et s'agenouillerent to^s devãt le Chat et l'adorer[~e]t en luy baillãt
     le^r foy, et luy dist ladite Vieillesse [*q] ledit Chat estoet le
     diable.'[187]

Françoise Secretain, in 1598, saw the Devil 'tantost en forme de chat'.
Rolande de Vernois said, 'Le Diable se presenta pour lors au Sabbat en
forme d'vn groz chat noir.'[188] In 1652 another French witch confessed
that 'il entra dans sa chambre en forme d'ung chat et se changea en la
posture d'un home vestu de rouge', who took her to the Sabbath.[189] Both
the Devonshire witches, Mary Trembles and Susanna Edwards, in 1682, stated
that they saw him as a lion, by which they possibly meant a large cat.[190]
In this connexion it is worth noting that in Lapland as late as 1767 the
devil appeared 'in the likeness of a cat, handling them from their feet to
their mouth, and counting their teeth'.[191]

3. _Dog._--At Chelmsford in 1556 Joan Waterhouse 'dydde as she had seene
her mother doe, callynge Sathan, whiche came to her (as she sayd) in the
lykenes of a great dogge'.[192] In 1616 Barthélemy Minguet of Brécy was
tried for witchcraft. 'Enquis, comme il a aduis quand le Sabbat se doit
tenir. Respond, que c'est le Diable qui luy vient dire estant en forme de
chien noir, faict comme vn barbet, parle à luy en ceste forme. Enquis, en
quelle forme se met le Diable estant au Sabbat. Respond, qu'il ne l'a
iamais veu autrement qu'en forme de barbet noir. Enquis, quelles ceremonies
ils obseruent estant au Sabbat. Respond, que le Diable estant en forme de
barbet noir (comme dessus est dit) se met tout droit sur les pattes de
derriere, les preche'.[193] etc. In Guernsey in 1617 Isabel Becquet went to
Rocquaine Castle, 'the usual place where the Devil kept his Sabbath; no
sooner had she arrived there than the Devil came to her in the form of a
dog, with two great horns sticking up: and with one of his paws (which
seemed to her like hands) took her by the hand: and calling her by her name
told her that she was welcome: then immediately the Devil made her kneel
down: while he himself stood up on his hind legs; he then made her express
detestation of the Eternal in these words: _I renounce God the Father, God
the Son, and God the Holy Ghost_; and then caused her to worship and invoke
himself.'[194] Barton's wife, about 1655, stated that 'one Night going to a
dancing upon Pentland-hills, he went before us in the likeness of a rough
tanny-Dog, playing on a pair of Pipes, and his tail played ey wig wag wig
wag'.[195] In 1658 an Alloa witch named Jonet Blak declared that he
appeared to her first as 'a dog with a sowis head'.[196] In 1661 Jonet
Watson of Dalkeith said that 'the Deivill apeired vnto her, in the liknes
of ane prettie boy, in grein clothes, and went away from her in the liknes
of ane blak doug'.[197] According to Marie Lamont of Innerkip in 1662, 'the
devill in the likeness of a brown dog' helped to raise a storm.[198]
Margaret Hamilton, widow of James Pullwart of Borrowstowness in 1679, was
accused that she met 'the devil in the likeness of a man, but he removed
from you in the likeness of an black dog'.[199] The Highland witches in
the eighteenth century saw the devil as a dog; he was 'a large black ugly
tyke', to whom the witches made obeisance; the dog acknowledged the homage
'by bowing, grinning, and clapping his paws'.[200] In the case of the
dog-disguise, there is again a similarity with Lapp beliefs and customs,
the appearance of the Devil as a dog being not uncommon in Lapland.[201]

4. _Goat._--An interesting point as regards this form of disguise is that
it does not occur in Great Britain, nor have I found it so far in Belgium.
It prevailed chiefly in France, from which all my examples are taken. At
Poictiers in 1574 'trois Sorciers & vne Sorciere declarent qu'ils estoyent
trois fois l'an, à l'assemblée generale, où plusieurs Sorciers se
trouuoyent prés d'vne croix d'vn carrefour, qui seruoit d'enseigne. Et là
se trouuoit vn grand bouc noir, qui parloit comme vne personne aux
assistans, & dansoyent à l'entour du bouc.'[202] At Avignon in 1581 'when
hee comes to be adored, he appeareth not in a humane forme, but as the
Witches themselues haue deposed, as soone as they are agreed of the time
that he is to mount vpon the altar (which is some rock or great stone in
the fields) there to bee worshipped by them, hee instantly turneth himselfe
into the forme of a great black Goate, although in all other occasions hee
vseth to appeare in the shape of a man.[203] In Lorraine in 1589 the Devil
'sich in einen zottelichten Bock verwandelt hat, und viel stärker reucht
und übeler stinckt als immer ein Bock im Anfang des Frühlings thun
mag'.[204] In Puy de Dôme in 1594 Jane Bosdeau's lover took her to a
meeting, and 'there appeared a great Black Goat with a Candle between his
Horns'.[205] In 1598 'Satan apres auoir prins la figure d'vn Bouc, se
consume en feu'.[206] In the Basses-Pyrénées in 1609:

     'le Diable estoit en forme de bouc, ayant vne queue, & au-dessoubs vn
     visage d'homme noir, & n'a parole par ce visage de derriere.--Marie
     d'Aguerre dit qu'il y a vne grande cruche au milieu du Sabbat, d'où
     sort le Diable en forme de bouc.--D'autres disent qu'il est comme vn
     grand bouc, ayant deux cornes devant & deux en derriere; que celles de
     devant se rebrassent en haut comme la perruque d'vne femme. Mais le
     commun est qu'il a seulement trois cornes, & qu'il a quelque espece de
     lumiere en celle du milieu. On luy voit aussi quelque espece de bonet
     ou chapeau au dessus de ces cornes. On a obserué de tout temps que
     lorsqu'il veut receuoir quelcun à faire pacte auec luy, il se presente
     tousiours en homme, pour ne l'effaroucher ou effraier: car faire pacte
     auec vn Bouc ouuertement, tiendroit plus de la beste que de la
     creature raisonnable. Mais le pacte faict, lors qu'il veut receuoir
     quelqu'vn à l'adoration, communem[~e]t il se represente en Bouc.'[207]

Silvain Nevillon confessed at Orleans in 1614 'qu'il a veu le Diable en
plusieurs façons, tantost comme vn bouc, ayant vn visage deuant & vn autre
derriere'.[208]

5. _Horse._--I give here only the references to the Devil when actually
disguised as a horse, but there are a very great number of cases where he
appeared riding on a horse. These cases are so numerous as to suggest that
the horse was part of the ritual, especially as the riding Devil usually
occurs in places where an animal disguise was not used, e.g. in 1598, in
Aberdeen, where Andro Man 'confessis that Crystsunday rydis all the tyme
that he is in thair cumpanie'.[209] The actual disguise as a horse is not
common. Elizabeth Stile of Windsor in 1579 'confesseth, her self often
tymes to haue gon to Father Rosimond house where she found hym sittyng in a
Wood, not farre from thence, vnder the bodie of a Tree, sometymes in the
shape of an Ape, and otherwhiles like an Horse'.[210] Helen Guthrie in 1661
stated that when the Forfar witches were trying to sink a ship, 'the divell
wes there present with them all, in the shape of ane great horse. They
returned all in the same liknes as of befor, except that the divell wes in
the shape of a man.'[211] Mary Lacey of Salem in 1692 said that he
appeared in the shape of a horse. 'I was in bed and the devil came to me
and bid me obey him.'[212]

6. _Sheep._--The sheep-disguise, which is perhaps a form of the goat, is
usually found in France only. In 1453 'Guillaume Edeline, docteur en
théologie, prieur de S. Germain en Laye, et auparavant Augustin, et
religieux de certaines aultres ordres ... confessa, de sa bonne et franche
voulonté, avoir fait hommage audit ennemy en l'espèce et semblance d'ung
mouton'.[213] Iaquema Paget and Antoine Gandillon in 1598 said that 'il
prenoit la figure d'vn mouton noir, portant des cornes'.[214] In 1614 at
Orleans Silvain Nevillon was induced to reveal all he knew; 'dit qu'il a
veu le Diable en plusieurs façons, tantost comme vn bouc, ores comme vn
gros mouton'.[215]

The rarer animal disguises are the deer and the bear. Of these the deer is
found at Aberdeen in 1597, Andro Man 'confessis and affermis, thow saw
Christsonday cum owt of the snaw in liknes of a staig';[216] at Auldearne
in 1662, 'somtym he vold be lyk a stirk, a bull, a deir, a rae, or a
dowg';[217] at Hartford, Connecticut, 1662, Rebecca Greensmith said that
'the devil first appeared to her in the form of a deer or fawn'.[218] The
bear is still rarer, as I have found it only twice--once in Lorraine, and
once in Lancashire. In 1589 'es haben die Geister auch etwann Lust sich in
Gestalt eines Bären zu erzeigen'.[219] In 1613 Anne Chattox declared that
the Devil 'came vpon this Examinate in the night time: and at diuerse and
sundry times in the likenesse of a Beare, gaping as though he would haue
wearied [worried] this Examinate. And the last time of all shee, this
Examinate, saw him, was vpon Thursday last yeare but one, next before
Midsummer day, in the euening, like a Beare, and this Examinate would not
then speake vnto him, for the which the said Deuill pulled this Examinate
downe.'[220]