7. _The Sacrament_

The earliest example of the religious services occurs in 1324 in the trial
of Lady Alice Kyteler: 'In rifeling the closet of the ladie, they found a
Wafer of sacramentall bread, hauing the diuels name stamped thereon in
stead of Jesus Christ.'[584] According to Boguet (1589) the Devil did not
always perform the religious service himself, but mass was celebrated by a
priest among his followers; this custom is found in all countries and seems
to have been as common as that the Devil himself should perform the
service.

     'Celuy, qui est commis à faire l'office, est reuestu d'vne chappe
     noire sans croix, & apres auoir mis de l'eau dans le calice, il tourne
     le doz à l'autel, & puis esleue vn rond de raue teinte en noir, au
     lieu de l'hostie, & lors tous les Sorciers crient à haute voix,
     _Maistre, aide nous_. Le Diable en mesme temps pisse dans vn trou à
     terre, & fait de l'eau beniste de son vrine, de laquelle celuy, qui
     dit la messe, arrouse tous les assistans auec vn asperges noir.'[585]

The Devil of the Basses Pyrénées (1609) performed the religious ceremony
himself:

     'Il s'habille en Prestre pour dire Messe, laquelle il fait semblant de
     celebrer auec mille fourbes & souplesses, auprés d'vn arbre, ou
     parfois auprés d'vn rocher, dressant quelque forme d'autel sur des
     coloñes infernales, & sur iceluy sans dire le _Confiteor_, ny
     l'_Alleluya_, tournant les feuillets d'vn certain liure qu'il a en
     main, il commence à marmoter quelques mots de la Messe, & arriuant à
     l'offertoire il s'assiet, & toute l'assemblee le vient adorer le
     baisant sous la queuë, & allumant des chandelles noires: Puis luy
     baisent la main gauche, tremblans auec mille angoisses, & luy offrent
     du pain, des [oe]ufs, & de l'argent: & la Royne du Sabbat les reçoit,
     laquelle est assise à son costé gauche, & en sa main gauche elle tient
     vne paix ou platine, dans laquelle est grauee l'effigie de Lucifer,
     laquelle on ne baise qu'aprés l'auoir premierement baisée à elle. Puis
     il se met à prescher, son subiect est communément de la vaine
     gloire.... Il finit son sermon, & continue ses autres ceremonies,
     leuant vne certaine Hostie laquelle est noire & ronde, auec sa figure
     imprimée au dessus: & disant ces paroles, _Cecy est mon corps_, il
     leue l'Hostie sur ses cornes: & à cette esleuatiõ tous ceux de
     l'assemblee l'ador[~e]t en disant ces mots, _Aquerra Goity, Aquerra
     Beyty, Aquerra Goity, Aquerra Beyty_, qui veut dire, _Cabron arriba,
     Cabron abaro_, de mesme en font ils au Calice repetant ces mots,
     iusqu'à ce qu'il a vuidé tout ce qui est dans iceluy. Puis toute
     l'assemblee enuironnant l'autel en forme de croissant ou demy-lune,
     prosternez par terre, il leur fait vn autre sermon, puis leur baille à
     communier par ordre, donnant à chacun vn petit morceau de l'hostie, &
     pour leur donner moyen de l'aualer aisément, il leur donne deux
     gorgees de quelque medicine infernale, & certain breuuage de si
     mauuais goust & odeur, que l'aualant ils suent, & neantmoins il est si
     froid, qu'il leur gele le corps, les nerfs, & les moüelles. Puis il
     s'accouple auec elles, & leur commande d'en faire de mesme, si bien
     qu'ils commettent mille incestes & autres pechez contre nature. Puis
     il les inuite à se mettre à table.'[586]

At Aix in 1610 Magdalene de Demandouls 'said that that accursed Magician
Lewes [Gaufredy] did first inuent the saying of Masse at the Sabbaths, and
did really consecrate and present the sacrifice to Lucifer.... She also
related, that the said Magician did sprinkle the consecrated wine vpon all
the company, at which time euery one cryeth, _Sanguis eius super nos &
filios nostros_.'[587]

Lord Fountainhall remarks, 'In 1670 we heard that the Devil appeared in the
shape of a Minister, in the copper mines of Sweden, and attempted the same
villainous apery.'[588] The Scotch witches, like the Swedish, performed the
rite after the manner of the Reformed Churches. In 1678--

     'the devill had a great meeting of witches in Loudian, where, among
     others, was a warlock who formerly had been admitted to the ministrie
     in the presbyterian tymes, and when the bishops came in, conformed
     with them. But being found flagitious and wicked, was deposed by them,
     and now he turnes a preacher under the devill of hellish doctrine; for
     the devill at this tyme preaches to his witches really (if I may so
     term it) the doctrine of the infernall pitt, viz. blasphemies against
     God and his son Christ. Among other things, he told them that they
     were more happy in him than they could be in God; him they saw, but
     God they could not see; and in mockrie of Christ and his holy
     ordinance of the sacrament of his supper, he gives the sacrament to
     them, bidding them eat it and to drink it in remembrance of himself.
     This villan was assisting to Sathan in this action, and in
     preaching.'[589]

Fountainhall in writing of the same convention of witches says that the
Devil 'adventured to give them the communion or holy sacrament, the bread
was like wafers, the drink was sometimes blood sometimes black moss-water.
He preached and most blasphemously mocked them, if they offered to trust in
God who left them miserable in the world, and neither he nor his Son Jesus
Christ ever appeared to them when they called on them, as he had, who would
not cheat them.'[590]

The Abbé Guibourg (1679), head of the Paris witches, 'a fait chez la
Voisin, revêtu d'aube, d'étole et de manipule, une conjuration.'[591] The
same Abbé celebrated mass more than once over the body of a woman and with
the blood of a child, sacrificed for the occasion, in the chalice (see
section on Sacrifice). The woman, who served as the altar for these masses,
was always nude, and was the person for whose benefit the ceremony was
performed. Marguerite Montvoisin makes this clear:

     'Il est vrai aussi qu'une sage-femme qui demeurait au coin de la rue
     des Deux-Portes, distilla aussi les entrailles d'un enfant dont la
     mère y avait accouché.... Avant la distillation, les entrailles de
     l'enfant et l'arrière-faix de la mère avaient été portés à
     Saint-Denis, à Guibourg, par sa mère, la sage-femme et la mère de
     l'enfant, sur le ventre de laquelle sa mère, à son retour, lui dit que
     Guibourg avait dit la messe.'[592]

Guibourg acknowledged that, besides the one just quoted, he celebrated
three masses in this way. At the first he used a conjuration. 'Il dit la
deuxième messe dans une masure sur les remparts de Saint-Denis, sur la même
femme, avec les mêmes cérémonies.... Dit la troisième à Paris chez la
Voisin sur la même femme.'[593] The woman mentioned in Guibourg's
confession was Madame de Montespan herself. The following conjuration was
used at the first mass:

     'sur le ventre d'une femme': 'Astaroth, Asmodée, princes d'amitié, je
     vous conjure d'accepter le sacrifice que je vous présente de cet
     enfant pour les choses que je vous demande, qui sont l'amitié du Roi,
     de Mgr le Dauphin me soit continuée et être honorée des princes et
     princesses de la cour, que rien ne me soit dénié de tout ce que je
     demanderai au Roi, tant pour mes parents que serviteurs.'[594]

A very interesting case is that of the Rev. George Burroughs in New England
(1692):

     'He was Accused by Eight of the Confessing Witches, as being an Head
     Actor at some of their Hellish Randezvouses, and one who had the
     promise of being a King in Satan's kingdom, now going to be
     Erected.... One _Lacy_ testify'd that she and the prisoner [Martha
     Carrier] were once Bodily present at a _Witch-meeting_ in _Salem
     Village_; and that she knew the prisoner to be a Witch, and to have
     been at a Diabolical sacrament.... Another _Lacy_ testify'd that the
     prisoner was at the _Witch-meeting_, in _Salem Village_, where they
     had Bread and Wine Administred unto them.... Deliverance Hobbs
     affirmed that this [Bridget] _Bishop_ was at a General Meeting of the
     Witches, in a Field at _Salem_-Village, and there partook of a
     Diabolical Sacrament in Bread and Wine then administred.'[595]

Hutchinson had access to the same records and gives the same evidence,
though even more strongly: 'Richard Carrier affirmed to the jury that he
saw Mr. George Burroughs at the witch meeting at the village and saw him
administer the sacrament. Mary Lacy, sen^r. and her daughter Mary affirmed
that Mr. George Burroughs was at the witch meetings with witch sacrements,
and that she knows Mr. Burroughs to be of the company of witches.'[596]
John Hale has a similar record: 'This D. H. [Deliverance Hobbs] confessed
she was at a Witch Meeting at Salem Village.... And the said G. B. preached
to them, and such a Woman was their Deacon, and there they had a
Sacrament.'[597] Abigail Williams said 'that the Witches had a _Sacrament_
that day at an house in the Village, and that they had _Red Bread_ and _Red
Drink_'.[598] With the evidence before him Mather seems justified in saying
that the witches had 'their Diabolical Sacraments, imitating the _Baptism_
and the _Supper_ of our Lord'.[599]