CHAPTER II.

MYTHOLOGICAL.

_Principal Incarnations of Evil._


The present chapter is devoted to specimens of those skazkas which
most Russian critics assert to be distinctly mythical. The stories of
this class are so numerous, that the task of selection has been by no
means easy. But I have done my best to choose such examples as are
most characteristic of that species of the "mythical" folk-tale which
prevails in Russia, and to avoid, as far as possible, the repetition
of narratives which have already been made familiar to the English
reader by translations of German and Scandinavian stories.

There is a more marked individuality in the Russian tales of this
kind, as compared with those of Western Europe, than is to be traced
in the stories (especially those of a humorous cast) which relate to
the events that chequer an ordinary existence. The actors in the
_comediettas_ of European peasant-life vary but little, either in
title or in character, wherever the scene may be laid; just as in the
European beast-epos the Fox, the Wolf, and the Bear play parts which
change but slightly with the regions they inhabit. But the
supernatural beings which people the fairy-land peculiar to each race,
though closely resembling each other in many respects, differ
conspicuously in others. They may, it is true, be nothing more than
various developments of the same original type; they may be traceable
to germs common to the prehistoric ancestors of the now widely
separated Aryan peoples; their peculiarities may simply be due to the
accidents to which travellers from distant lands are liable. But at
all events each family now has features of its own, typical
characteristics by which it may be readily distinguished from its
neighbors. My chief aim at present is to give an idea of those
characteristics which lend individuality to the "mythical beings" in
the Skazkas; in order to effect this, I shall attempt a delineation of
those supernatural figures, to some extent peculiar to Slavonic
fairy-land, which make their appearance in the Russian folk-tales. I
have given a brief sketch of them elsewhere.[72] I now propose to deal
with them more fully, quoting at length, instead of merely mentioning,
some of the evidence on which the proof of their existence depends.

For the sake of convenience, we may select from the great mass of the
mythical skazkas those which are supposed most manifestly to typify
the conflict of opposing elements--whether of Good and Evil, or of
Light and Darkness, or of Heat and Cold, or of any other pair of
antagonistic forces or phenomena. The typical hero of this class of
stories, who represents the cause of right, and who is resolved by
mythologists into so many different essences, presents almost
identically the same appearance in most of the countries wherein he
has become naturalized. He is endowed with supernatural powers, but he
remains a man, for all that. Whether as prince or peasant, he alters
but very little in his wanderings among the Aryan races of Europe.

And a somewhat similar statement may be made about his feminine
counterpart--for all the types of Fairy-land life are of an
epicene nature, admitting of a feminine as well as a masculine
development--the heroine who in the Skazkas, as well as in other
folk-tales, braves the wrath of female demons in quest of means
whereby to lighten the darkness of her home, or rescues her bewitched
brothers from the thraldom of an enchantress, or liberates her captive
husband from a dungeon's gloom.

But their antagonists--the dark or evil beings whom the hero attacks
and eventually destroys, or whom the heroine overcomes by her virtues,
her subtlety, or her skill--vary to a considerable extent with the
region they occupy, or rather with the people in whose memories they
dwell. The Giants by killing whom our own Jack gained his renown, the
Norse Trolls, the Ogres of southern romance, the Drakos and Lamia of
modern Greece, the Lithuanian Laume--these and all the other groups of
monstrous forms under which the imagination of each race has embodied
its ideas about (according to one hypothesis) the Powers of Darkness
it feared, or (according to another) the Aborigines it detested,
differ from each other to a considerable and easily recognizable
extent. An excellent illustration of this statement is offered by the
contrast between the Slavonic group of supernatural beings of this
class and their equivalents in lands tenanted by non-Slavonic members
of the Indo-European family. A family likeness will, of course, be
traced between all these conceptions of popular fancy, but the gloomy
figures with which the folk-tales of the Slavonians render us familiar
may be distinguished at a glance among their kindred monsters of
Latin, Hellenic, Teutonic, or Celtic extraction. Of those among the
number to which the Russian skazkas relate I will now proceed to give
a sketch, allowing the stories, so far as is possible, to speak for
themselves.

If the powers of darkness in the "mythical" skazkas are divided into
two groups--the one male, the other female--there stand out as the
most prominent figures in the former set, the Snake (or some other
illustration of "Zoological Mythology"), Koshchei the Deathless, and
the Morskoi Tsar or King of the Waters. In the latter group the
principal characters are the Baba Yaga, or Hag, her close connection
the Witch, and the Female Snake. On the forms and natures of the less
conspicuous characters to be found in either class we will not at
present dwell. An opportunity for commenting on some of them will be
afforded in another chapter.

To begin with the Snake. His outline, like that of the cloud with
which he is so frequently associated, and which he is often supposed
to typify, is seldom well-defined. Now in one form and now in another,
he glides a shifting shape, of which it is difficult to obtain a
satisfactory view. Sometimes he retains throughout the story an
exclusively reptilian character; sometimes he is of a mixed nature,
partly serpent and partly man. In one story we see him riding on
horseback, with hawk on wrist (or raven on shoulder) and hound at
heel; in another he figures as a composite being with a human body and
a serpent's head; in a third he flies as a fiery snake into his
mistress's bower, stamps with his foot on the ground, and becomes a
youthful gallant. But in most cases he is a serpent which in outward
appearance seems to differ from other ophidians only in being winged
and polycephalous--the number of his heads generally varying from
three to twelve.[73]

He is often known by the name of Zméï [snake] Goruinuich [son of the
_gora_ or mountain], and sometimes he is supposed to dwell in the
mountain caverns. To his abode, whether in the bowels of the earth, or
in the open light of day--whether it be a sumptuous palace or "an
_izba_ on fowl's legs," a hut upheld by slender supports on which it
turns as on a pivot--he carries off his prey. In one story he appears
to have stolen, or in some way concealed, the day-light; in another
the bright moon and the many stars come forth from within him after
his death. But as a general rule it is some queen or princess whom he
tears away from her home, as Pluto carried off Proserpina, and who
remains with him reluctantly, and hails as her rescuer the hero who
comes to give him battle. Sometimes, however, the snake is represented
as having a wife of his own species, and daughters who share their
parent's tastes and powers. Such is the case in the (South-Russian)
story of


  IVAN POPYALOF.[74]

  Once upon a time there was an old couple, and they had three
  sons. Two of these had their wits about them, but the third
  was a simpleton, Ivan by name, surnamed Popyalof.

  For twelve whole years Ivan lay among the ashes from the
  stove; but then he arose, and shook himself, so that six poods
  of ashes[75] fell off from him.

  Now in the land in which Ivan lived there was never any
  day, but always night. That was a Snake's doing. Well, Ivan
  undertook to kill that Snake, so he said to his father, "Father,
  make me a mace five poods in weight." And when he had got
  the mace, he went out into the fields, and flung it straight up in
  the air, and then he went home. The next day he went out into
  the fields to the spot from which he had flung the mace on high,
  and stood there with his head thrown back. So when the mace
  fell down again it hit him on the forehead. And the mace
  broke in two.

  Ivan went home and said to his father, "Father, make me
  another mace, a ten pood one." And when he had got it he
  went out into the fields, and flung it aloft. And the mace went
  flying through the air for three days and three nights. On the
  fourth day Ivan went out to the same spot, and when the mace
  came tumbling down, he put his knee in the way, and the mace
  broke over it into three pieces.

  Ivan went home and told his father to make him a third
  mace, one of fifteen poods weight. And when he had got it, he
  went out into the fields and flung it aloft. And the mace was
  up in the air six days. On the seventh Ivan went to the same
  spot as before. Down fell the mace, and when it struck Ivan's
  forehead, the forehead bowed under it. Thereupon he said,
  "This mace will do for the Snake!"

  So when he had got everything ready, he went forth with
  his brothers to fight the Snake. He rode and rode, and presently
  there stood before him a hut on fowl's legs,[76] and in that
  hut lived the Snake. There all the party came to a standstill.
  Then Ivan hung up his gloves, and said to his brothers, "Should
  blood drop from my gloves, make haste to help me." When he
  had said this he went into the hut and sat down under the
  boarding.[77]

  Presently there rode up a Snake with three heads. His
  steed stumbled, his hound howled, his falcon clamored.[78] Then
  cried the Snake:

  "Wherefore hast thou stumbled, O Steed! hast thou howled,
  O Hound! hast thou clamored, O Falcon?"

  "How can I but stumble," replied the Steed, "when under
  the boarding sits Ivan Popyalof?"

  Then said the Snake, "Come forth, Ivanushka! Let us
  try our strength together." Ivan came forth, and they began to
  fight. And Ivan killed the Snake, and then sat down again
  beneath the boarding.

  Presently there came another Snake, a six-headed one, and
  him, too, Ivan killed. And then there came a third, which had
  twelve heads. Well, Ivan began to fight with him, and lopped
  off nine of his heads. The Snake had no strength left in him.
  Just then a raven came flying by, and it croaked:

  "Krof? Krof!"[79]

  Then the Snake cried to the Raven, "Fly, and tell my wife
  to come and devour Ivan Popyalof."

  But Ivan cried: "Fly, and tell my brothers to come, and
  then we will kill this Snake, and give his flesh to thee."

  And the Raven gave ear to what Ivan said, and flew to his
  brothers and began to croak above their heads. The brothers
  awoke, and when they heard the cry of the Raven, they hastened
  to their brother's aid. And they killed the Snake, and then,
  having taken his heads, they went into his hut and destroyed
  them. And immediately there was bright light throughout the
  whole land.

  After killing the Snake, Ivan Popyalof and his brothers set
  off on their way home. But he had forgotten to take away his
  gloves, so he went back to fetch them, telling his brothers to
  wait for him meanwhile. Now when he had reached the hut
  and was going to take away his gloves, he heard the voices of
  the Snake's wife and daughters, who were talking with each
  other. So he turned himself into a cat, and began to mew
  outside the door. They let him in, and he listened to everything
  they said. Then he got his gloves and hastened away.

  As soon as he came to where his brothers were, he mounted
  his horse, and they all started afresh. They rode and rode;
  presently they saw before them a green meadow, and on that
  meadow lay silken cushions. Then the elder brothers said,
  "Let's turn out our horses to graze here, while we rest ourselves
  a little."

  But Ivan said, "Wait a minute, brothers!" and he seized
  his mace, and struck the cushions with it. And out of those
  cushions there streamed blood.

  So they all went on further. They rode and rode; presently
  there stood before them an apple-tree, and upon it were gold
  and silver apples. Then the elder brothers said, "Let's eat an
  apple apiece." But Ivan said, "Wait a minute, brothers; I'll
  try them first," and he took his mace, and struck the apple-tree
  with it. And out of the tree streamed blood.

  So they went on further. They rode and rode, and by and
  by they saw a spring in front of them. And the elder brothers
  cried, "Let's have a drink of water." But Ivan Popyalof
  cried: "Stop, brothers!" and he raised his mace and struck
  the spring, and its waters became blood.

  For the meadow, the silken cushions, the apple-tree, and the
  spring, were all of them daughters of the Snake.

  After killing the Snake's daughters, Ivan and his brothers
  went on homewards. Presently came the Snake's Wife flying
  after them, and she opened her jaws from the sky to the earth,
  and tried to swallow up Ivan. But Ivan and his brothers threw
  three poods of salt into her mouth. She swallowed the salt,
  thinking it was Ivan Popyalof, but afterwards--when she had
  tasted the salt, and found out it was not Ivan--she flew after
  him again.

  Then he perceived that danger was at hand, and so he let
  his horse go free, and hid himself behind twelve doors in the
  forge of Kuzma and Demian. The Snake's Wife came flying
  up, and said to Kuzma and Demian, "Give me up Ivan Popyalof."
  But they replied:

  "Send your tongue through the twelve doors and take him."
  So the Snake's Wife began licking the doors. But meanwhile
  they all heated iron pincers, and as soon as she had sent her
  tongue through into the smithy, they caught tight hold of her
  by the tongue, and began thumping her with hammers. And
  when the Snake's Wife was dead they consumed her with fire,
  and scattered her ashes to the winds. And then they went
  home, and there they lived and enjoyed themselves, feasting
  and revelling, and drinking mead and wine.

  I was there, too, and had liquor to drink; it didn't go into
  my mouth, but only ran down my beard.[80]

The skazka of Ivan Buikovich (Bull's son)[81] contains a variant of
part of this story, but the dragon which the Slavonic St. George kills
is called, not a snake, but a Chudo-Yudo.[82] Ivan watches one night
while his brothers sleep. Presently up rides "a six-headed Chudo-Yudo"
which he easily kills. The next night he slays, but with more
difficulty, a nine-headed specimen of the same family. On the third
night appears "a twelve-headed Chudo-Yudo," mounted on a horse "with
twelve wings, its coat of silver, its mane and tail of gold." Ivan
lops off three of the monster's heads, but they, like those of the
Lernæan Hydra, become re-attached to their necks at the touch of their
owner's "fiery finger." Ivan, whom his foe has driven into the ground
up to his knees, hurls one of his gloves at the hut in which his
brothers are sleeping. It smashes the windows, but the sleepers
slumber on and take no heed. Presently Ivan smites off six of his
antagonist's heads, but they grow again as before.[83] Half buried in
the ground by the monster's strength, Ivan hurls his other glove at
the hut, piercing its roof this time. But still his brothers slumber
on. At last, after fruitlessly shearing off nine of the Chudo-Yudo's
heads, and finding himself embedded in the ground up to his armpits,
Ivan flings his cap at the hut. The hut reels under the blow and its
beams fall asunder; his brothers awake, and hasten to his aid, and the
Chudo-Yudo is destroyed. The "Chudo-Yudo wives" as the widows of the
three monsters are called, then proceed to play the parts attributed
in "Ivan Popyalof" to the Snake's daughters.

"I will become an apple-tree with golden and silver apples," says the
first; "whoever plucks an apple will immediately burst." Says the
second, "I will become a spring--on the water will float two cups, the
one golden, the other of silver; whoever touches one of the cups, him
will I drown." And the third says, "I will become a golden bed;
whoever lies down upon that bed will be consumed with fire." Ivan, in
a sparrow's form, overhears all this, and acts as in the preceding
story. The three widows die, but their mother, "an old witch,"
determines on revenge. Under the form of a beggar-woman she asks alms
from the retreating brothers. Ivan tenders her a ducat. She seizes,
not the ducat, but his outstretched hand, and in a moment whisks him
off underground to her husband, an Aged One, whose appearance is that
of the mythical being whom the Servians call the Vy. He "lies on an
iron couch, and sees nothing; his long eyelashes and thick eyebrows
completely hide his eyes," but he sends for "twelve mighty heroes,"
and orders them to take iron forks and lift up the hair about his
eyes, and then he gazes at the destroyer of his family. The glance of
the Servian Vy is supposed to be as deadly as that of a basilisk, but
the patriarch of the Russian story does not injure his captive. He
merely sends him on an errand which leads to a fresh set of
adventures, of which we need not now take notice.

In a third variant of the story,[84] they are snakes which are killed
by the hero, Ivan Koshkin (Cat's son), and it is a Baba Yaga, or Hag,
who undertakes to revenge their deaths and those of their wives, her
daughters. Accordingly she pursues the three brothers, and succeeds in
swallowing two of them. The third, Ivan Koshkin, takes refuge in a
smithy, and, as before, the monster's tongue is seized, and she is
beaten with hammers until she disgorges her prey, none the worse for
their temporary imprisonment.

We have seen, in the story about the Chudo-Yudo, that the place
usually occupied by the Snake is at times filled by some other magical
being. This frequently occurs in that class of stories which relates
how three brothers set out to apprehend a trespasser, or to seek a
mother or sister who has been mysteriously spirited away. They usually
come either to an opening which leads into the underground world, or
to the base of an apparently inaccessible hill. The youngest brother
descends or ascends as the case may be, and after a series of
adventures which generally lead him through the kingdoms of copper, of
silver, and of gold, returns in triumph to where his brothers are
awaiting him. And he is almost invariably deserted by them, as soon as
they have secured the beautiful princesses who accompany him--as may
be read in the following (South-Russian) history of--


  THE NORKA.[85]

  Once upon a time there lived a king and queen. They had three
  sons, two of them with their wits about them, but the third a
  simpleton. Now the King had a deer-park in which were quantities
  of wild animals of different kinds. Into that park there
  used to come a huge beast--Norka was its name--and do fearful
  mischief, devouring some of the animals every night. The King
  did all he could, but he was unable to destroy it. So at last he
  called his sons together and said: "Whoever will destroy the
  Norka, to him will I give the half of my kingdom."

  Well, the eldest son undertook the task. As soon as it was
  night, he took his weapons and set out. But before he reached
  the park, he went into a _traktir_ (or tavern), and there he spent
  the whole night in revelry. When he came to his senses it was
  too late; the day had already dawned. He felt himself disgraced
  in the eyes of his father, but there was no help for it. The next
  day the second son went, and did just the same. Their father
  scolded them both soundly, and there was an end of it.

  Well, on the third day the youngest son undertook the task.
  They all laughed him to scorn, because he was so stupid, feeling
  sure he wouldn't do anything. But he took his arms, and went
  straight into the park, and sat down on the grass in such a position
  that, the moment he went asleep, his weapons would prick
  him, and he would awake.

  Presently the midnight hour sounded. The earth began to
  shake, and the Norka came rushing up, and burst right through
  the fence into the park, so huge was it. The Prince pulled himself
  together, leapt to his feet, crossed himself, and went straight
  at the beast. It fled back, and the Prince ran after it. But he
  soon saw that he couldn't catch it on foot, so he hastened to the
  stable, laid his hands on the best horse there, and set off in
  pursuit. Presently he came up with the beast, and they began a
  fight. They fought and fought; the Prince gave the beast three
  wounds. At last they were both utterly exhausted, so they lay
  down to take a short rest. But the moment the Prince closed his
  eyes, up jumped the Beast and took to flight. The Prince's horse
  awoke him; up he jumped in a moment, and set off again in
  pursuit, caught up the Beast, and again began fighting with it.
  Again the Prince gave the Beast three wounds, and then he and
  the Beast lay down again to rest. Thereupon away fled the
  Beast as before. The Prince caught it up, and again gave it
  three wounds. But all of a sudden, just as the Prince began
  chasing it for the fourth time, the Beast fled to a great white
  stone, tilted it up, and escaped into the other world,[86] crying out
  to the Prince: "Then only will you overcome me, when you
  enter here."

  The Prince went home, told his father all that had happened,
  and asked him to have a leather rope plaited, long enough to
  reach to the other world. His father ordered this to be done.
  When the rope was made, the Prince called for his brothers, and
  he and they, having taken servants with them, and everything that
  was needed for a whole year, set out for the place where the
  Beast had disappeared under the stone. When they got there,
  they built a palace on the spot, and lived in it for some time.
  But when everything was ready, the youngest brother said to
  the others: "Now, brothers, who is going to lift this stone?"

  Neither of them could so much as stir it, but as soon as he
  touched it, away it flew to a distance, though it was ever so big--big
  as a hill. And when he had flung the stone aside, he spoke
  a second time to his brothers, saying:

  "Who is going into the other world, to overcome the Norka?"

  Neither of them offered to do so. Then he laughed at them
  for being such cowards, and said:

  "Well, brothers, farewell! Lower me into the other world,
  and don't go away from here, but as soon as the cord is jerked,
  pull it up."

  His brothers lowered him accordingly, and when he had
  reached the other world, underneath the earth, he went on his
  way. He walked and walked. Presently he espied a horse with
  rich trappings, and it said to him:

  "Hail, Prince Ivan! Long have I awaited thee!"

  He mounted the horse and rode on--rode and rode, until he
  saw standing before him, a palace made of copper. He entered
  the courtyard, tied up his horse, and went indoors. In one of
  the rooms a dinner was laid out. He sat down and dined, and
  then went into a bedroom. There he found a bed, on which he
  lay down to rest. Presently there came in a lady, more beautiful
  than can be imagined anywhere but in a skazka, who said:

  "Thou who art in my house, name thyself! If thou art an
  old man, thou shall be my father; if a middle-aged man, my
  brother; but if a young man, thou shalt be my husband dear.
  And if thou art a woman, and an old one, thou shalt be my grandmother;
  if middle-aged, my mother; and if a girl, thou shalt be
  my own sister."[87]

  Thereupon he came forth. And when she saw him, she was
  delighted with him, and said:

  "Wherefore, O Prince Ivan--my husband dear shalt thou be!--wherefore
  hast thou come hither?"

  Then he told her all that had happened, and she said:

  "That beast which thou wishest to overcome is my brother.
  He is staying just now with my second sister, who lives not far
  from here in a silver palace. I bound up three of the wounds
  which thou didst give him."

  Well, after this they drank, and enjoyed themselves, and held
  sweet converse together, and then the prince took leave of her,
  and went on to the second sister, the one who lived in the silver
  palace, and with her also he stayed awhile. She told him that
  her brother Norka was then at her youngest sister's. So he
  went on to the youngest sister, who lived in a golden palace.
  She told him that her brother was at that time asleep on the
  blue sea, and she gave him a sword of steel and a draught of the
  Water of Strength, and she told him to cut off her brother's
  head at a single stroke. And when he had heard these things,
  he went his way.

  And when the Prince came to the blue sea, he looked--there
  slept Norka on a stone in the middle of the sea; and when it
  snored, the water was agitated for seven versts around. The
  Prince crossed himself, went up to it and smote it on the head
  with his sword. The head jumped off, saying the while, "Well,
  I'm done for now!" and rolled far away into the sea.

  After killing the Beast, the Prince went back again, picking
  up all the three sisters by the way, with the intention of taking
  them out into the upper world: for they all loved him and would
  not be separated from him. Each of them turned her palace
  into an egg--for they were all enchantresses--and they taught
  him how to turn the eggs into palaces, and back again, and they
  handed over the eggs to him. And then they all went to the
  place from which they had to be hoisted into the upper world.
  And when they came to where the rope was, the Prince took
  hold of it and made the maidens fast to it.[88] Then he jerked
  away at the rope, and his brothers began to haul it up. And
  when they had hauled it up, and had set eyes on the wondrous
  maidens, they went aside and said: "Let's lower the rope, pull
  our brother part of the way up, and then cut the rope. Perhaps
  he'll be killed; but then if he isn't, he'll never give us these
  beauties as wives."

  So when they had agreed on this, they lowered the rope.
  But their brother was no fool; he guessed what they were at,
  so he fastened the rope to a stone, and then gave it a pull.
  His brothers hoisted the stone to a great height, and then cut
  the rope. Down fell the stone and broke in pieces; the Prince
  poured forth tears and went away. Well, he walked and walked.
  Presently a storm arose; the lightning flashed, the thunder
  roared, the rain fell in torrents. He went up to a tree in order
  to take shelter under it, and on that tree he saw some young
  birds which were being thoroughly drenched. So he took off
  his coat and covered them over with it, and he himself sat down
  under the tree. Presently there came flying a bird--such a big
  one, that the light was blotted out by it. It had been dark
  there before, but now it became darker still. Now this was the
  mother of those small birds which the Prince had covered up.
  And when the bird had come flying up, she perceived that her
  little ones were covered over, and she said, "Who has wrapped
  up my nestlings?" and presently, seeing the Prince, she added:
  "Didst thou do that? Thanks! In return, ask of me any
  thing thou desirest. I will do anything for thee."

  "Then carry me into the other world," he replied.

  "Make me a large _zasyek_[89] with a partition in the middle,"
  she said; "catch all sorts of game, and put them into one half
  of it, and into the other half pour water; so that there may be
  meat and drink for me."

  All this the Prince did. Then the bird--having taken the
  _zasyek_ on her back, with the Prince sitting in the middle of it--began
  to fly. And after flying some distance she brought him
  to his journey's end, took leave of him, and flew away back.
  But he went to the house of a certain tailor, and engaged himself
  as his servant. So much the worse for wear was he, so
  thoroughly had he altered in appearance, that nobody would
  have suspected him of being a Prince.

  Having entered into the service of this master, the Prince
  began to ask what was going on in that country. And his
  master replied: "Our two princes--for the third one has disappeared--have
  brought away brides from the other world, and
  want to marry them, but those brides refuse. For they insist
  on having all their wedding-clothes made for them first, exactly
  like those which they used to have in the other world, and that
  without being measured for them. The King has called all the
  workmen together, but not one of them will undertake to do it."

  The Prince, having heard all this, said, "Go to the King,
  master, and tell him that you will provide everything that's in
  your line."

  "However can I undertake to make clothes of that sort;
  I work for quite common folks," says his master.

  "Go along, master! I will answer for everything," says
  the Prince.

  So the tailor went. The King was delighted that at least
  one good workman had been found, and gave him as much
  money as ever he wanted. When the tailor had settled everything,
  he went home. And the Prince said to him:

  "Now then, pray to God, and lie down to sleep; to-morrow
  all will be ready." And the tailor followed his lad's advice,
  and went to bed.

  Midnight sounded. The Prince arose, went out of the city
  into the fields, took out of his pocket the eggs which the
  maidens had given him, and, as they had taught him, turned
  them into three palaces. Into each of these he entered, took
  the maidens' robes, went out again, turned the palaces back
  into eggs, and went home. And when he got there he hung up
  the robes on the wall, and lay down to sleep.

  Early in the morning his master awoke, and behold! there
  hung such robes as he had never seen before, all shining with
  gold and silver and precious stones. He was delighted, and he
  seized them and carried them off to the King. When the princesses
  saw that the clothes were those which had been theirs in
  the other world, they guessed that Prince Ivan was in this
  world, so they exchanged glances with each other, but they
  held their peace. And the master, having handed over the
  clothes, went home, but he no longer found his dear journeyman
  there. For the Prince had gone to a shoemaker's, and him too
  he sent to work for the King; and in the same way he went the
  round of all the artificers, and they all proffered him thanks,
  inasmuch as through him they were enriched by the King.

  By the time the princely workman had gone the round of all
  the artificers, the princesses had received what they had asked
  for; all their clothes were just like what they had been in the
  other world. Then they wept bitterly because the Prince had
  not come, and it was impossible for them to hold out any
  longer, it was necessary that they should be married. But when
  they were ready for the wedding, the youngest bride said to the
  King:

  "Allow me, my father, to go and give alms to the beggars."

  He gave her leave, and she went and began bestowing alms
  upon them, and examining them closely. And when she had
  come to one of them, and was going to give him some money,
  she caught sight of the ring which she had given to the Prince
  in the other world, and her sisters' rings too--for it really was
  he. So she seized him by the hand, and brought him into the
  hall, and said to the King:

  "Here is he who brought us out of the other world. His
  brothers forbade us to say that he was alive, threatening to slay
  us if we did."

  Then the King was wroth with those sons, and punished
  them as he thought best. And afterwards three weddings were
  celebrated.

      [The conclusion of this story is somewhat obscure.
      Most of the variants represent the Prince as forgiving
      his brothers, and allowing them to marry two of the
      three princesses, but the present version appears to
      keep closer to its original, in which the prince
      doubtless married all three. With this story may be
      compared: Grimm, No. 166, "Der starke Hans," and No.
      91, "Dat Erdmänneken." See also vol. iii. p. 165,
      where a reference is given to the Hungarian story in
      Gaal, No. 5--Dasent, No. 55, "The Big Bird Dan," and
      No. 56, "Soria Moria Castle" (Asbjörnsen and Moe, Nos.
      3 and 2. A somewhat similar story, only the palaces
      are in the air, occurs in Asbjörnsen's "Ny Samling,"
      No. 72)--Campbell's "Tales of the West Highlands," No.
      58--Schleicher's "Litauische Märchen," No. 38--The
      Polish story, Wojcicki, Book iii. No. 6, in which
      Norka is replaced by a witch who breaks the windows of
      a church, and is wounded, in falcon-shape, by the
      youngest brother--Hahn, No. 70, in which a Drakos, as
      a cloud, steals golden apples, a story closely
      resembling the Russian skazka. See also No. 26, very
      similar to which is the Servian Story in "Vuk
      Karajich," No. 2--and a very interesting Tuscan story
      printed for the first time by A. de Gubernatis,
      "Zoological Mythology," vol. ii. p. 187. See also
      ibid. p. 391.

      But still more important than these are the parallels
      offered by Indian fiction. Take, for instance, the
      story of Sringabhuja, in chap. xxxix. of book vii. of
      the "Kathásaritságara." In it the elder sons of a
      certain king wish to get rid of their younger
      half-brother. One day a Rákshasa appears in the form
      of a gigantic crane. The other princes shoot at it in
      vain, but the youngest wounds it, and then sets off in
      pursuit of it, and of the valuable arrow which is
      fixed in it. After long wandering he comes to a castle
      in a forest. There he finds a maiden who tells him she
      is the daughter of the Rákshasa whom, in the form of a
      crane, he has wounded. She at once takes his part
      against her demon father, and eventually flies with
      him to his own country. The perils which the fugitives
      have to encounter will be mentioned in the remarks on
      Skazka XIX. See Professor Brockhaus's summary of the
      story in the "Berichte der phil. hist. Classe der K.
      Sächs. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften," 1861, pp.
      223-6. Also Professor Wilson's version in his "Essays
      on Sanskrit Literature," vol. ii. pp. 134-5.

      In two other stories in the same collection the hero
      gives chase to a boar of gigantic size. It takes
      refuge in a cavern into which he follows it. Presently
      he finds himself in a different world, wherein he
      meets a beauteous maiden who explains everything to
      him. In the first of these two stories the lady is the
      daughter of a Rákshasa, who is invulnerable except in
      the palm of the left hand, for which reason, our hero,
      Chandasena has been unable to wound him when in his
      boar disguise. She instructs Chandasena how to kill
      her father, who accordingly falls a victim to a
      well-aimed shaft. (Brockhaus's "Mährchensammlung des
      Somadeva Bhatta," 1843, vol. i. pp. 110-13). In the
      other story, the lady turns out to be a princess whom
      "a demon with fiery eyes" had carried off and
      imprisoned. She tells the hero, Saktideva, that the
      demon has just died from a wound inflicted upon him,
      while transformed into a boar, by a bold archer.
      Saktideva informs her that he is that archer.
      Whereupon she immediately requests him to marry her
      (ibid. vol. ii. p. 175). In both stories the boar is
      described as committing great ravages in the upper
      world until the hero attacks it.]

The Adventures of a prince, the youngest of three brothers, who has
been lowered into the underground world or who has ascended into an
enchanted upper realm, form the theme of numerous skazkas, several of
which are variants of the story of Norka. The prince's elder brothers
almost always attempt to kill him, when he is about to ascend from the
gulf or descend from the steeps which separate him from them. In one
instance, the following excuse is offered for their conduct. The hero
has killed a Snake in the underground world, and is carrying its head
on a lance, when his brothers begin to hoist him up. "His brothers
were frightened at the sight of that head and thinking the Snake
itself was coming, they let Ivan fall back into the pit."[90] But this
apology for their behavior seems to be due to the story-teller's
imagination. In some instances their unfraternal conduct may be
explained in the following manner. In oriental tales the hero is often
the son of a king's youngest wife, and he is not unnaturally hated by
his half-brothers, the sons of an older queen, whom the hero's mother
has supplanted in their royal father's affections. Accordingly they do
their best to get rid of him. Thus, in one of the Indian stories which
correspond to that of Norka, the hero's success at court "excited the
envy and jealousy of his brothers [doubtless half-brothers], and they
were not satisfied until they had devised a plan to effect his
removal, and, as they hoped, accomplish his destruction."[91] We know
also that "Israel loved Joseph more than all his children," because he
was the son "of his old age," and the result was that "when his
brethren [who were only his half-brothers] saw that their father loved
him more than all his brethren, they hated him."[92] When such tales
as these came west in Christian times, their references to polygamy
were constantly suppressed, and their distinctions between brothers
and half-brothers disappeared. In the same way the elder and jealous
wife, who had behaved with cruelty in the original stories to the
offspring of her rival, often became turned, under Christian
influences, into a stepmother who hated her husband's children by a
previous marriage.

There may, however, be a mythological explanation of the behavior of
the two elder brothers. Professor de Gubernatis is of opinion that "in
the Vedic hymns, Tritas, the third brother, and the ablest as well as
best, is persecuted by his brothers," who, "in a fit of jealousy, on
account of his wife, the aurora, and the riches she brings with her
from the realm of darkness, the cistern or well [into which he has
been lowered], detain their brother in the well,"[93] and he compares
this form of the myth with that which it assumes in the following
Hindoo tradition. "Three brothers, _Ekata_ (_i.e._ the first), _Dwita_
(_i.e._ the second) and _Trita_ (_i.e._ the third) were travelling in
a desert, and being distressed with thirst, came to a well, from which
the youngest, Trita, drew water and gave it to his brothers; in
requital, they drew him into the well, in order to appropriate his
property and having covered the top with a cart-wheel, left him in the
well. In this extremity he prayed to the gods to extricate him, and by
their favor he made his escape."[94] This myth may, perhaps, be the
germ from which have sprung the numerous folk-tales about the
desertion of a younger brother in some pit or chasm, into which his
brothers have lowered him.[95]

It may seem more difficult to account for the willingness of Norka's
three sisters to aid in his destruction--unless, indeed, the whole
story be considered to be mythological, as its Indian equivalents
undoubtedly are. But in many versions of the same tale the difficulty
does not arise. The princesses of the copper, silver, and golden
realms, are usually represented as united by no ties of consanguinity
with the snake or other monster whom the hero comes to kill. In the
story of "Usuinya,"[96] for instance, there appears to be no
relationship between these fair maidens and the "Usuinya-Bird," which
steals the golden apples from a monarch's garden and is killed by his
youngest son Ivan. That monster is not so much a bird as a flying
dragon. "This Usuinya-bird is a twelve-headed snake," says one of the
fair maidens. And presently it arrives--its wings stretching afar,
while along the ground trail its moustaches [_usui_, whence its name].
In a variant of the same story in another collection,[97] the part of
Norka is played by a white wolf. In that of Ivan Suchenko[98] it is
divided among three snakes who have stolen as many princesses. For the
snake is much given to abduction, especially when he appears under the
terrible form of "Koshchei, the Deathless."

Koshchei is merely one of the many incarnations of the dark spirit
which takes so many monstrous shapes in the folk-tales of the class
with which we are now dealing. Sometimes he is described as altogether
serpent-like in form; sometimes he seems to be of a mixed nature,
partly human and partly ophidian, but in some of the stories he is
apparently framed after the fashion of a man. His name is by some
mythologists derived from _kost'_, a bone whence comes a verb
signifying to become ossified, petrified, or frozen; either because he
is bony of limb, or because he produces an effect akin to freezing or
petrifaction.[99]

He is called "Immortal" or "The Deathless,"[100] because of his
superiority to the ordinary laws of existence. Sometimes, like Baldur,
he cannot be killed except by one substance; sometimes his
"death"--that is, the object with which his life is indissolubly
connected--does not exist within his body. Like the vital centre of
"the giant who had no heart in his body" in the well-known Norse tale,
it is something extraneous to the being whom it affects, and until it
is destroyed he may set all ordinary means of annihilation at
defiance. But this is not always the case, as may be learnt from one
of the best of the skazkas in which he plays a leading part, the
history of--


  MARYA MOREVNA.[101]

  In a certain kingdom there lived a Prince Ivan. He had three
  sisters. The first was the Princess Marya, the second the Princess
  Olga, the third the Princess Anna. When their father and
  mother lay at the point of death, they had thus enjoined their
  son:--"Give your sisters in marriage to the very first suitors
  who come to woo them. Don't go keeping them by you!"

  They died and the Prince buried them, and then, to solace his
  grief, he went with his sisters into the garden green to stroll.
  Suddenly the sky was covered by a black cloud; a terrible storm
  arose.

  "Let us go home, sisters!" he cried.

  Hardly had they got into the palace, when the thunder
  pealed, the ceiling split open, and into the room where they were,
  came flying a falcon bright. The Falcon smote upon the ground,
  became a brave youth, and said:

  "Hail, Prince Ivan! Before I came as a guest, but now I
  have come as a wooer! I wish to propose for your sister, the
  Princess Marya."

  "If you find favor in the eyes of my sister, I will not interfere
  with her wishes. Let her marry you in God's name!"

  The Princess Marya gave her consent; the Falcon married
  her and bore her away into his own realm.

  Days follow days, hours chase hours; a whole year goes by.
  One day Prince Ivan and his two sisters went out to stroll in
  the garden green. Again there arose a stormcloud with whirlwind
  and lightning.

  "Let us go home, sisters!" cried the Prince. Scarcely had
  they entered the palace, when the thunder crashed, the roof
  burst into a blaze, the ceiling split in twain, and in flew an eagle.
  The Eagle smote upon the ground and became a brave youth.

  "Hail, Prince Ivan! Before I came as a guest, but now I
  have come as a wooer!"

  And he asked for the hand of the Princess Olga. Prince
  Ivan replied:

  "If you find favor in the eyes of the Princess Olga, then let
  her marry you. I will not interfere with her liberty of choice."

  The Princess Olga gave her consent and married the Eagle.
  The Eagle took her and carried her off to his own kingdom.

  Another year went by. Prince Ivan said to his youngest
  sister:

  "Let us go out and stroll in the garden green!"

  They strolled about for a time. Again there arose a stormcloud,
  with whirlwind and lightning.

  "Let us return home, sister!" said he.

  They returned home, but they hadn't had time to sit down
  when the thunder[102] crashed, the ceiling split open, and in flew
  a raven. The Raven smote upon the floor and became a brave
  youth. The former youths had been handsome, but this one
  was handsomer still.

  "Well, Prince Ivan! Before I came as a guest, but now I
  have come as a wooer. Give me the Princess Anna to wife."

  "I won't interfere with my sister's freedom. If you gain her
  affections, let her marry you."

  So the Princess Anna married the Raven, and he bore her
  away to his own realm. Prince Ivan was left alone. A whole
  year he lived without his sisters; then he grew weary, and
  said:--

  "I will set out in search of my sisters."

  He got ready for the journey, he rode and rode, and one day
  he saw a whole army lying dead on the plain. He cried aloud,
  "If there be a living man there, let him make answer! who has
  slain this mighty host?"

  There replied unto him a living man:

  "All this mighty host has been slain by the fair Princess
  Marya Morevna."

  Prince Ivan rode further on, and came to a white tent, and
  forth came to meet him the fair Princess Marya Morevna.

  "Hail Prince!" says she, "whither does God send you?
  and is it of your free will or against your will?"

  Prince Ivan replied, "Not against their will do brave youths
  ride!"

  "Well, if your business be not pressing, tarry awhile in my
  tent."

  Thereat was Prince Ivan glad. He spent two nights in the
  tent, and he found favor in the eyes of Marya Morevna, and
  she married him. The fair Princess, Marya Morevna, carried
  him off into her own realm.

  They spent some time together, and then the Princess took
  it into her head to go a warring. So she handed over all the
  housekeeping affairs to Prince Ivan, and gave him these instructions:

  "Go about everywhere, keep watch over everything, only do
  not venture to look into that closet there."

  He couldn't help doing so. The moment Marya Morevna
  had gone he rushed to the closet, pulled open the door, and
  looked in--there hung Koshchei the Deathless, fettered by
  twelve chains. Then Koshchei entreated Prince Ivan, saying,--

  "Have pity upon me and give me to drink! Ten years long
  have I been here in torment, neither eating or drinking; my
  throat is utterly dried up."

  The Prince gave him a bucketful of water; he drank it up
  and asked for more, saying:

  "A single bucket of water will not quench my thirst; give
  me more!"

  The Prince gave him a second bucketful. Koshchei drank
  it up and asked for a third, and when he had swallowed the
  third bucketful, he regained his former strength, gave his chains
  a shake, and broke all twelve at once.

  "Thanks, Prince Ivan!" cried Koshchei the deathless,
  "now you will sooner see your own ears than Marya Morevna!"
  and out of the window he flew in the shape of a terrible whirlwind.
  And he came up with the fair Princess Marya Morevna
  as she was going her way, laid hold of her, and carried her off
  home with him. But Prince Ivan wept full sore, and he arrayed
  himself and set out a wandering, saying to himself: "Whatever
  happens, I will go and look for Marya Morevna!"

  One day passed, another day passed: at the dawn of the
  third day he saw a wondrous palace, and by the side of the palace
  stood an oak, and on the oak sat a falcon bright. Down flew
  the Falcon from the oak, smote upon the ground, turned into a
  brave youth and cried aloud:

  "Ha, dear brother-in-law! how deals the Lord with you?"

  Out came running the Princess Marya, joyfully greeted her
  brother Ivan, and began enquiring after his health, and telling
  him all about herself. The Prince spent three days with them,
  then he said:

  "I cannot abide with you; I must go in search of my wife
  the fair Princess Marya Morevna."

  "Hard will it be for you to find her," answered the Falcon.
  "At all events leave with us your silver spoon. We will look at
  it and remember you." So Prince Ivan left his silver spoon at
  the Falcon's, and went on his way again.

  On he went one day, on he went another day, and by the
  dawn of the third day he saw a palace still grander than the former
  one, and hard by the palace stood an oak, and on the oak
  sat an eagle. Down flew the eagle from the oak, smote upon
  the ground, turned into a brave youth, and cried aloud:

  "Rise up, Princess Olga! Hither comes our brother dear!"

  The Princess Olga immediately ran to meet him, and began
  kissing him and embracing him, asking after his health and telling
  him all about herself. With them Prince Ivan stopped three
  days; then he said:

  "I cannot stay here any longer. I am going to look for my
  wife, the fair Princess Marya Morevna."

  "Hard will it be for you to find her," replied the Eagle,
  "Leave with us a silver fork. We will look at it and remember
  you."

  He left a silver fork behind, and went his way. He travelled
  one day, he travelled two days; at daybreak on the third day he
  saw a palace grander than the first two, and near the palace
  stood an oak, and on the oak sat a raven. Down flew the Raven
  from the oak, smote upon the ground, turned into a brave youth,
  and cried aloud:

  "Princess Anna, come forth quickly! our brother is coming!"

  Out ran the Princess Anna, greeted him joyfully, and began
  kissing and embracing him, asking after his health and telling
  him all about herself. Prince Ivan stayed with them three days;
  then he said:

  "Farewell! I am going to look for my wife, the fair Princess
  Marya Morevna."

  "Hard will it be for you to find her," replied the Raven,
  "Anyhow, leave your silver snuff-box with us. We will look at
  it and remember you."

  The Prince handed over his silver snuff-box, took his leave
  and went his way. One day he went, another day he went, and
  on the third day he came to where Marya Morevna was. She
  caught sight of her love, flung her arms around his neck, burst
  into tears, and exclaimed:

  "Oh, Prince Ivan! why did you disobey me, and go looking
  into the closet and letting out Koshchei the Deathless?"

  "Forgive me, Marya Morevna! Remember not the past;
  much better fly with me while Koshchei the Deathless is out of
  sight. Perhaps he won't catch us."

  So they got ready and fled. Now Koshchei was out hunting.
  Towards evening he was returning home, when his good steed
  stumbled beneath him.

  "Why stumblest thou, sorry jade? scentest thou some ill?"

  The steed replied:

  "Prince Ivan has come and carried off Marya Morevna."

  "Is it possible to catch them?"

  "It is possible to sow wheat, to wait till it grows up, to reap
  it and thresh it, to grind it to flour, to make five pies of it, to
  eat those pies, and then to start in pursuit--and even then to be
  in time."

  Koshchei galloped off and caught up Prince Ivan.

  "Now," says he, "this time I will forgive you, in return for
  your kindness in giving me water to drink. And a second time
  I will forgive you; but the third time beware! I will cut you to
  bits."

  Then he took Marya Morevna from him, and carried her off.
  But Prince Ivan sat down on a stone and burst into tears. He
  wept and wept--and then returned back again to Marya Morevna.
  Now Koshchei the Deathless happened not to be at home.

  "Let us fly, Marya Morevna!"

  "Ah, Prince Ivan! he will catch us."

  "Suppose he does catch us. At all events we shall have
  spent an hour or two together."

  So they got ready and fled. As Koshchei the Deathless was
  returning home, his good steed stumbled beneath him.

  "Why stumblest thou, sorry jade? scentest thou some
  ill?"

  "Prince Ivan has come and carried off Marya Morevna."

  "Is it possible to catch them?"

  "It is possible to sow barley, to wait till it grows up, to reap
  it and thresh it, to brew beer, to drink ourselves drunk on it,
  to sleep our fill, and then to set off in pursuit--and yet to be in
  time."

  Koshchei galloped off, caught up Prince Ivan:

  "Didn't I tell you that you should not see Marya Morevna
  any more than your own ears?"

  And he took her away and carried her off home with him.

  Prince Ivan was left there alone. He wept and wept; then
  he went back again after Marya Morevna. Koshchei happened
  to be away from home at that moment.

  "Let us fly, Marya Morevna."

  "Ah, Prince Ivan! He is sure to catch us and hew you in
  pieces."

  "Let him hew away! I cannot live without you."

  So they got ready and fled.

  Koshchei the Deathless was returning home when his good
  steed stumbled beneath him.

  "Why stumblest thou? scentest thou any ill?"

  "Prince Ivan has come and has carried off Marya Morevna."

  Koshchei galloped off, caught Prince Ivan, chopped him into
  little pieces, put them in a barrel, smeared it with pitch and
  bound it with iron hoops, and flung it into the blue sea. But
  Marya Morevna he carried off home.

  At that very time, the silver turned black which Prince Ivan
  had left with his brothers-in-law.

  "Ah!" said they, "the evil is accomplished sure enough!"

  Then the Eagle hurried to the blue sea, caught hold of the
  barrel, and dragged it ashore; the Falcon flew away for the
  Water of Life, and the Raven for the Water of Death.

  Afterwards they all three met, broke open the barrel, took out
  the remains of Prince Ivan, washed them, and put them together
  in fitting order. The Raven sprinkled them with the Water of
  Death--the pieces joined together, the body became whole. The
  Falcon sprinkled it with the Water of Life--Prince Ivan shuddered,
  stood up, and said:

  "Ah! what a time I've been sleeping!"

  "You'd have gone on sleeping a good deal longer, if it hadn't
  been for us," replied his brothers-in-law. "Now come and pay
  us a visit."

  "Not so, brothers; I shall go and look for Marya Morevna."

  And when he had found her, he said to her:

  "Find out from Koshchei the Deathless whence he got so
  good a steed."

  So Marya Morevna chose a favorable moment, and began
  asking Koshchei about it. Koshchei replied:

  "Beyond thrice nine lands, in the thirtieth kingdom, on the
  other side of the fiery river, there lives a Baba Yaga. She has
  so good a mare that she flies right round the world on it every
  day. And she has many other splendid mares. I watched her
  herds for three days without losing a single mare, and in return
  for that the Baba Yaga gave me a foal."

  "But how did you get across the fiery river?"

  "Why, I've a handkerchief of this kind--when I wave it
  thrice on the right hand, there springs up a very lofty bridge and
  the fire cannot reach it."

  Marya Morevna listened to all this, and repeated it to Prince
  Ivan, and she carried off the handkerchief and gave it to him.
  So he managed to get across the fiery river, and then went on to
  the Baba Yaga's. Long went he on without getting anything
  either to eat or to drink. At last he came across an outlandish[103]
  bird and its young ones. Says Prince Ivan:

  "I'll eat one of these chickens."

  "Don't eat it, Prince Ivan!" begs the outlandish bird;
  "some time or other I'll do you a good turn."

  He went on farther and saw a hive of bees in the forest.

  "I'll get a bit of honeycomb," says he.

  "Don't disturb my honey, Prince Ivan!" exclaims the queen
  bee; "some time or other I'll do you a good turn."

  So he didn't disturb it, but went on. Presently there met
  him a lioness with her cub.

  "Anyhow I'll eat this lion cub," says he; "I'm so hungry, I
  feel quite unwell!"

  "Please let us alone, Prince Ivan," begs the lioness; "some
  time or other I'll do you a good turn."

  "Very well; have it your own way," says he.

  Hungry and faint he wandered on, walked farther and farther
  and at last came to where stood the house of the Baba Yaga.
  Round the house were set twelve poles in a circle, and on each
  of eleven of these poles was stuck a human head, the twelfth
  alone remained unoccupied.

  "Hail, granny!"

  "Hail, Prince Ivan! wherefore have you come? Is it of your
  own accord, or on compulsion?"

  "I have come to earn from you a heroic steed."

  "So be it, Prince, you won't have to serve a year with me, but
  just three days. If you take good care of my mares, I'll give you
  a heroic steed. But if you don't--why then you mustn't be
  annoyed at finding your head stuck on top of the last pole up
  there."

  Prince Ivan agreed to these terms. The Baba Yaga gave
  him food and drink, and bid him set about his business. But the
  moment he had driven the mares afield, they cocked up their
  tails, and away they tore across the meadows in all directions.
  Before the Prince had time to look round, they were all out of
  sight. Thereupon he began to weep and to disquiet himself, and
  then he sat down upon a stone and went to sleep. But when the
  sun was near its setting, the outlandish bird came flying up to him,
  and awakened him saying:--

  "Arise, Prince Ivan! the mares are at home now."

  The Prince arose and returned home. There the Baba Yaga
  was storming and raging at her mares, and shrieking:--

  "Whatever did ye come home for?"

  "How could we help coming home?" said they. "There
  came flying birds from every part of the world, and all but pecked
  our eyes out."

  "Well, well! to-morrow don't go galloping over the meadows,
  but disperse amid the thick forests."

  Prince Ivan slept all night. In the morning the Baba Yaga
  says to him:--

  "Mind, Prince! if you don't take good care of the mares, if
  you lose merely one of them--your bold head will be stuck on
  that pole!"

  He drove the mares afield. Immediately they cocked up their
  tails and dispersed among the thick forests. Again did the
  Prince sit down on the stone, weep and weep, and then go to
  sleep. The sun went down behind the forest. Up came running
  the lioness.

  "Arise, Prince Ivan! The mares are all collected."

  Prince Ivan arose and went home. More than ever did the
  Baba Yaga storm at her mares and shriek:--

  "Whatever did ye come back home for?"

  "How could we help coming back? Beasts of prey came
  running at us from all parts of the world, all but tore us utterly
  to pieces."

  "Well, to-morrow run off into the blue sea."

  Again did Prince Ivan sleep through the night. Next morning
  the Baba Yaga sent him forth to watch the mares:

  "If you don't take good care of them," says she, "your bold
  head will be stuck on that pole!"

  He drove the mares afield. Immediately they cocked up
  their tails, disappeared from sight, and fled into the blue sea.
  There they stood, up to their necks in water. Prince Ivan sat
  down on the stone, wept, and fell asleep. But when the sun had
  set behind the forest, up came flying a bee and said:--

  "Arise, Prince! The mares are all collected. But when
  you get home, don't let the Baba Yaga set eyes on you, but go
  into the stable and hide behind the mangers. There you will
  find a sorry colt rolling in the muck. Do you steal it, and at
  the dead of night ride away from the house."

  Prince Ivan arose, slipped into the stable, and lay down behind
  the mangers, while the Baba Yaga was storming away at
  her mares and shrieking:--

  "Why did ye come back?"

  "How could we help coming back? There came flying bees
  in countless numbers from all parts of the world, and began
  stinging us on all sides till the blood came!"

  The Baba Yaga went to sleep. In the dead of the night
  Prince Ivan stole the sorry colt, saddled it, jumped on its back,
  and galloped away to the fiery river. When he came to that river
  he waved the handkerchief three times on the right hand, and
  suddenly, springing goodness knows whence, there hung across
  the river, high in the air, a splendid bridge. The Prince rode
  across the bridge and waved the handkerchief twice only on the
  left hand; there remained across the river a thin--ever so thin
  a bridge!

  When the Baba Yaga got up in the morning, the sorry colt
  was not to be seen! Off she set in pursuit. At full speed did
  she fly in her iron mortar, urging it on with the pestle, sweeping
  away her traces with the broom. She dashed up to the fiery
  river, gave a glance, and said, "A capital bridge!" She drove
  on to the bridge, but had only got half-way when the bridge
  broke in two, and the Baba Yaga went flop into the river. There
  truly did she meet with a cruel death!

  Prince Ivan fattened up the colt in the green meadows, and
  it turned into a wondrous steed. Then he rode to where Marya
  Morevna was. She came running out, and flung herself on his
  neck, crying:--

  "By what means has God brought you back to life?"

  "Thus and thus," says he. "Now come along with me."

  "I am afraid, Prince Ivan! If Koshchei catches us, you will
  be cut in pieces again."

  "No, he won't catch us! I have a splendid heroic steed now;
  it flies just like a bird." So they got on its back and rode
  away.

  Koshchei the Deathless was returning home when his horse
  stumbled beneath him.

  "What art thou stumbling for, sorry jade? dost thou scent
  any ill?"

  "Prince Ivan has come and carried off Marya Morevna."

  "Can we catch them?"

  "God knows! Prince Ivan has a horse now which is better
  than I."

  "Well, I can't stand it," says Koshchei the Deathless. "I
  will pursue."

  After a time he came up with Prince Ivan, lighted on the
  ground, and was going to chop him up with his sharp sword.
  But at that moment Prince Ivan's horse smote Koshchei the
  Deathless full swing with its hoof, and cracked his skull, and the
  Prince made an end of him with a club. Afterwards the Prince
  heaped up a pile of wood, set fire to it, burnt Koshchei the
  Deathless on the pyre, and scattered his ashes to the wind.
  Then Marya Morevna mounted Koshchei's horse and Prince Ivan
  got on his own, and they rode away to visit first the Raven, and
  then the Eagle, and then the Falcon. Wherever they went they
  met with a joyful greeting.

  "Ah, Prince Ivan! why, we never expected to see you again.
  Well, it wasn't for nothing that you gave yourself so much trouble.
  Such a beauty as Marya Morevna one might search for all the
  world over--and never find one like her!"

  And so they visited, and they feasted; and afterwards they
  went off to their own realm.[104]

With the Baba Yaga, the feminine counterpart of Koshchei and the
Snake, we shall deal presently, and the Waters of Life and Death will
find special notice elsewhere.[105] A magic water, which brings back
the dead to life, plays a prominent part in the folk-lore of all
lands, but the two waters, each performing one part only of the cure,
render very noteworthy the Slavonic stories in which they occur. The
Princess, Marya Morevna, who slaughters whole armies before she is
married, and then becomes mild and gentle, belongs to a class of
heroines who frequently occur both in the stories and in the "metrical
romances," and to whom may be applied the remarks made by Kemble with
reference to a similar Amazon.[106] In one of the variants of the
story the representative of Marya Morevna fights the hero before she
marries him.[107] The Bluebeard incident of the forbidden closet is
one which often occurs in the Skazkas, as we shall see further on; and
the same may be said about the gratitude of the Bird, Bee, and
Lioness.

The story of Immortal Koshchei is one of very frequent occurrence,
the different versions maintaining a unity of idea, but varying
considerably in detail. In one of them,[108] in which Koshchei's part
is played by a Snake, the hero's sisters are carried off by their
feathered admirers without his leave being asked--an omission for
which a full apology is afterwards made; in another, the history of
"Fedor Tugarin and Anastasia the Fair,"[109] the hero's three sisters
are wooed and won, not by the Falcon, the Eagle, and the Raven, but by
the Wind, the Hail, and the Thunder. He himself marries the terrible
heroine Anastasia the Fair, in the forbidden chamber of whose palace
he finds a snake "hung up by one of its ribs." He gives it a lift and
it gets free from its hook and flies away, carrying off Anastasia the
Fair. Fedor eventually finds her, escapes with her on a magic foal
which he obtains, thanks to the aid of grateful wolves, bees, and
crayfish, and destroys the snake by striking it "on the forehead" with
the stone which was destined to be its death. In a third version of
the story,[110] the hero finds in the forbidden chamber "Koshchei the
Deathless, in a cauldron amid flames, boiling in pitch." There he has
been, he declares, for fifteen years, having been lured there by the
beauty of Anastasia the Fair. In a fourth,[111] in which the hero's
three sisters marry three beggars, who turn out to be snakes with
twenty, thirty, and forty heads apiece, Koshchei is found in the
forbidden chamber, seated on a horse which is chained to a cauldron.
He begs the hero to unloose the horse, promising, in return, to save
him from three deaths.

      [Into the mystery of the forbidden chamber I will not
      enter fully at present. Suffice to say that there can
      be little doubt as to its being the same as that in
      which Bluebeard kept the corpses of his dead wives. In
      the Russian, as well as in the Oriental stories, it is
      generally the curiosity of a man, not of a woman,
      which leads to the opening of the prohibited room. In
      the West of Europe the fatal inquisitiveness is more
      frequently ascribed to a woman. For parallels see the
      German stories of "Marienkind," and "Fitchers Vogel."
      (Grimm, _KM._, Nos. 3 and 46, also the notes in Bd.
      iii. pp. 8, 76, 324.) Less familiar than these is,
      probably, the story of "Die eisernen Stiefel" (Wolf's
      "Deutsche Hausmärchen," 1851, No. 19), in which the
      hero opens a forbidden door--that of a
      summer-house--and sees "deep down below him the earth,
      and on the earth his father's palace," and is seized
      by a sudden longing after his former home. The
      Wallachian story of "The Immured Mother" (Schott, No.
      2) resembles Grimm's "Marienkind" in many points. But
      its forbidden chamber differs from that of the German
      tale. In the latter the rash intruder sees "die
      Dreieinigkeit im Feuer und Glanz sitzen;" in the
      former, "the Holy Mother of God healing the wounds of
      her Son, the Lord Christ." In the Neapolitan story of
      "Le tre Corune" (Pentamerone, No. 36), the forbidden
      chamber contains "three maidens, clothed all in gold,
      sitting and seeming to slumber upon as many thrones"
      (Liebrecht's translation, ii. 76). The Esthonian tale
      of the "Wife-murderer" (Löwe's "Ehstnische Märchen,"
      No. 20) is remarkably--not to say suspiciously--like
      that French story of Blue Beard which has so often
      made our young blood run cold. Sister Anne is
      represented, and so are the rescuing brothers, the
      latter in the person of the heroine's old friend and
      playmate, Tönnis the goose-herd. Several very curious
      Gaelic versions of the story are given by Mr. Campbell
      ("Tales of the West Highlands," No. 41, ii. 265-275).
      Two of the three daughters of a poor widow look into a
      forbidden chamber, find it "full of dead gentlewomen,"
      get stained knee-deep in blood, and refuse to give a
      drop of milk to a cat which offers its services. So
      their heads are chopped off. The third daughter makes
      friends with the cat, which licks off the tell-tale
      blood, so she escapes detection. In a Greek story
      (Hahn, ii. p. 197) the hero discovers in the
      one-and-fortieth room of a castle belonging to a
      Drakos, who had given him leave to enter forty only, a
      magic horse, and before the door of the room he finds
      a pool of gold in which he becomes gilded. In another
      (Hahn, No. 15) a prince finds in the forbidden
      fortieth a lake in which fairies of the swan-maiden
      species are bathing. In a third (No. 45) the fortieth
      room contains a golden horse and a golden dog which
      assist their bold releaser. In a fourth (No. 68) it
      imprisons "a fair maiden, shining like the sun," whom
      the demon proprietor of the castle has hung up within
      it by her hair.

      As usual, all these stories are hard to understand.
      But one of the most important of their Oriental
      equivalents is perfectly intelligible. When Saktideva,
      in the fifth book of the "Kathásaritságara," comes
      after long travel to the Golden City, and is welcomed
      as her destined husband by its princess, she warns him
      not to ascend the central terrace of her palace. Of
      course he does so, and finds three chambers, in each
      of which lies the lifeless form of a fair maiden.
      After gazing at these seeming corpses, in one of which
      he recognizes his first love, he approaches a horse
      which is grazing beside a lake. The horse kicks him
      into the water; he sinks deep--and comes up again in
      his native land. The whole of the story is, towards
      its termination, fully explained by one of its
      principal characters--one of the four maidens whom
      Saktideva simultaneously marries. With the version of
      this romance in the "Arabian Nights" ("History of the
      Third Royal Mendicant," Lane, i. 160-173), everyone is
      doubtless acquainted. A less familiar story is that of
      Kandarpaketu, in the second book of the "Hitopadesa,"
      who lives happily for a time as the husband of the
      beautiful semi-divine queen of the Golden City. At
      last, contrary to her express commands, he ventures to
      touch a picture of a Vidyádharí. In an instant the
      pictured demigoddess gives him a kick which sends him
      flying back into his own country.

      For an explanation of the myth which lies at the root
      of all these stories, see Cox's "Mythology of the
      Aryan Nations," ii. 36, 330. See also Professor de
      Gubernatis's "Zoological Mythology," i. 168.]

We will now take one of those versions of the story which describe how
Koshchei's death is brought about by the destruction of that
extraneous object on which his existence depends. The incident is one
which occupies a prominent place in the stories of this class current
in all parts of Europe and Asia, and its result is almost always the
same. But the means by which that result is brought about differ
considerably in different lands. In the Russian tales the "death" of
the Evil Being with whom the hero contends--the substance, namely, the
destruction of which involves his death--is usually the last of a
sequence of objects either identical with, or closely resembling,
those mentioned in the following story of--


  KOSHCHEI THE DEATHLESS.[112]

  In a certain country there once lived a king, and he had three
  sons, all of them grown up. All of a sudden Koshchei the
  Deathless carried off their mother. Then the eldest son craved
  his father's blessing, that he might go and look for his mother.
  His father gave him his blessing, and he went off and disappeared,
  leaving no trace behind. The second son waited and waited,
  then he too obtained his father's blessing--and he also disappeared.
  Then the youngest son, Prince Ivan, said to his father,
  "Father, give me your blessing, and let me go and look for my
  mother."

  But his father would not let him go, saying, "Your brothers
  are no more; if you likewise go away, I shall die of grief."

  "Not so, father. But if you bless me I shall go; and if you
  do not bless me I shall go."

  So his father gave him his blessing.

  Prince Ivan went to choose a steed, but every one that he
  laid his hand upon gave way under it. He could not find a steed
  to suit him, so he wandered with drooping brow along the road
  and about the town. Suddenly there appeared an old woman,
  who asked:

  "Why hangs your brow so low, Prince Ivan?"

  "Be off, old crone," he replied. "If I put you on one of my
  hands, and give it a slap with the other, there'll be a little wet
  left, that's all."[113]

  The old woman ran down a by-street, came to meet him a
  second time, and said:

  "Good day, Prince Ivan! why hangs your brow so low?"

  Then he thought:

  "Why does this old woman ask me? Mightn't she be of
  use to me?"--and he replied:

  "Well, mother! because I cannot get myself a good steed."

  "Silly fellow!" she cried, "to suffer, and not to ask the old
  woman's help! Come along with me."

  She took him to a hill, showed him a certain spot, and said:

  "Dig up that piece of ground."

  Prince Ivan dug it up and saw an iron plate with twelve padlocks
  on it. He immediately broke off the padlocks, tore open
  a door, and followed a path leading underground. There,
  fastened with twelve chains, stood a heroic steed which evidently
  heard the approaching steps of a rider worthy to mount it, and
  so began to neigh and to struggle, until it broke all twelve of its
  chains. Then Prince Ivan put on armor fit for a hero, and
  bridled the horse, and saddled it with a Circassian saddle. And
  he gave the old woman money, and said to her:

  "Forgive me, mother, and bless me!" then he mounted his
  steed and rode away.

  Long time did he ride; at last he came to a mountain--a
  tremendously high mountain, and so steep that it was utterly
  impossible to get up it. Presently his brothers came that way.
  They all greeted each other, and rode on together, till they came
  to an iron rock[114] a hundred and fifty poods in weight, and on it
  was this inscription, "Whosoever will fling this rock against
  the mountain, to him will a way be opened." The two elder
  brothers were unable to lift the rock, but Prince Ivan at the
  first try flung it against the mountain--and immediately there
  appeared a ladder leading up the mountain side.

  Prince Ivan dismounted, let some drops of blood run from
  his little finger into a glass, gave it to his brothers, and said:

  "If the blood in this glass turns black, tarry here no longer:
  that will mean that I am about to die." Then he took leave of
  them and went his way.

  He mounted the hill. What did not he see there? All
  sorts of trees were there, all sorts of fruits, all sorts of birds!
  Long did Prince Ivan walk on; at last he came to a house, a
  huge house! In it lived a king's daughter who had been carried
  off by Koshchei the Deathless. Prince Ivan walked round the
  enclosure, but could not see any doors. The king's daughter
  saw there was some one there, came on to the balcony, and
  called out to him, "See, there is a chink in the enclosure; touch
  it with your little finger, and it will become a door."

  What she said turned out to be true. Prince Ivan went into
  the house, and the maiden received him kindly, gave him to eat
  and to drink, and then began to question him. He told her how
  he had come to rescue his mother from Koshchei the Deathless.
  Then the maiden said:

  "It will be difficult for you to get at your mother, Prince
  Ivan. You see, Koshchei is not mortal: he will kill you. He
  often comes here to see me. There is his sword, fifty poods in
  weight. Can you lift it? If so, you may venture to go."

  Not only did Prince Ivan lift the sword, but he tossed it
  high in the air. So he went on his way again.

  By-and-by he came to a second house. He knew now where
  to look for the door, and he entered in. There was his mother.
  With tears did they embrace each other.

  Here also did he try his strength, heaving aloft a ball which
  weighed some fifteen hundred poods. The time came for
  Koshchei the Deathless to arrive. The mother hid away her
  son. Suddenly Koshchei the Deathless entered the house and
  cried out, "Phou, Phou! A Russian bone[115] one usen't to hear
  with one's ears, or see with one's eyes, but now a Russian bone
  has come to the house! Who has been with you? Wasn't it
  your son?"

  "What are you talking about, God bless you! You've been
  flying through Russia, and got the air up your nostrils, that's
  why you fancy it's here," answered Prince Ivan's mother, and
  then she drew nigh to Koshchei, addressed him in terms of
  affection, asked him about one thing and another, and at last
  said:

  "Whereabouts is your death, O Koshchei?"

  "My death," he replied, "is in such a place. There stands
  an oak, and under the oak is a casket, and in the casket is a
  hare, and in the hare is a duck, and in the duck is an egg, and
  in the egg is my death."

  Having thus spoken, Koshchei the Deathless tarried there a
  little longer, and then flew away.

  The time came--Prince Ivan received his mother's blessing,
  and went to look for Koshchei's death. He went on his way a
  long time without eating or drinking; at last he felt mortally
  hungry, and thought, "If only something would come my way!"
  Suddenly there appeared a young wolf; he determined to kill
  it. But out from a hole sprang the she wolf, and said, "Don't
  hurt my little one; I'll do you a good turn." Very good! Prince
  Ivan let the young wolf go. On he went and saw a crow.
  "Stop a bit," he thought, "here I shall get a mouthful." He
  loaded his gun and was going to shoot, but the crow exclaimed,
  "Don't hurt me; I'll do you a good turn."

  Prince Ivan thought the matter over and spared the crow.
  Then he went farther, and came to a sea and stood still on the
  shore. At that moment a young pike suddenly jumped out of
  the water and fell on the strand. He caught hold of it, and
  thought--for he was half dead with hunger--"Now I shall have
  something to eat." All of a sudden appeared a pike and said,
  "Don't hurt my little one, Prince Ivan; I'll do you a good turn."
  And so he spared the little pike also.

  But how was he to cross the sea? He sat down on the shore
  and meditated. But the pike knew quite well what he was
  thinking about, and laid herself right across the sea. Prince
  Ivan walked along her back, as if he were going over a bridge,
  and came to the oak where Koshchei's death was. There he
  found the casket and opened it--out jumped the hare and ran
  away. How was the hare to be stopped?

  Prince Ivan was terribly frightened at having let the hare
  escape, and gave himself up to gloomy thoughts; but a wolf,
  the one he had refrained from killing, rushed after the hare,
  caught it, and brought it to Prince Ivan. With great delight
  he seized the hare, cut it open--and had such a fright! Out
  popped the duck and flew away. He fired after it, but shot
  all on one side, so again he gave himself up to his thoughts.
  Suddenly there appeared the crow with her little crows, and set
  off after the duck, and caught it, and brought it to Prince Ivan.
  The Prince was greatly pleased and got hold of the egg. Then
  he went on his way. But when he came to the sea, he began
  washing the egg, and let it drop into the water. However was
  he to get it out of the water? an immeasurable depth! Again
  the Prince gave himself up to dejection.

  Suddenly the sea became violently agitated, and the pike
  brought him the egg. Moreover it stretched itself across the
  sea. Prince Ivan walked along it to the other side, and then
  he set out again for his mother's. When he got there, they
  greeted each other lovingly, and then she hid him again as before.
  Presently in flew Koshchei the Deathless and said:

  "Phoo, Phoo! No Russian bone can the ear hear nor the
  eye see, but there's a smell of Russia here!"

  "What are you talking about, Koshchei? There's no one
  with me," replied Prince Ivan's mother.

  A second time spake Koshchei and said, "I feel rather unwell."

  Then Prince Ivan began squeezing the egg, and thereupon
  Koshchei the Deathless bent double. At last Prince Ivan came
  out from his hiding-place, held up the egg and said, "There is
  your death, O Koshchei the Deathless!"

  Then Koshchei fell on his knees before him, saying, "Don't
  kill me, Prince Ivan! Let's be friends! All the world will lie
  at our feet."

  But these words had no weight with Prince Ivan. He
  smashed the egg, and Koshchei the Deathless died.

  Ivan and his mother took all they wanted and started homewards.
  On their way they came to where the King's daughter
  was whom Ivan had seen on his way, and they took her with
  them too. They went further, and came to the hill where Ivan's
  brothers were still waiting for him. Then the maiden said,
  "Prince Ivan! do go back to my house. I have forgotten a
  marriage robe, a diamond ring, and a pair of seamless shoes."

  He consented to do so, but in the mean time he let his mother
  go down the ladder, as well as the Princess--whom it had been
  settled he was to marry when they got home. They were received
  by his brothers, who then set to work and cut away the ladder,
  so that he himself would not be able to get down. And they
  used such threats to his mother and the Princess, that they
  made them promise not to tell about Prince Ivan when they
  got home. And after a time they reached their native country.
  Their father was delighted at seeing his wife and his two sons,
  but still he was grieved about the other one, Prince Ivan.

  But Prince Ivan returned to the home of his betrothed, and
  got the wedding dress, and the ring, and the seamless shoes.
  Then he came back to the mountain and tossed the ring from
  one hand to the other. Immediately there appeared twelve
  strong youths, who said:

  "What are your commands?"

  "Carry me down from this hill."

  The youths immediately carried him down. Prince Ivan put
  the ring on his finger--they disappeared.

  Then he went on to his own country, and arrived at the city
  in which his father and brothers lived.

  There he took up his quarters in the house of an old woman,
  and asked her:

  "What news is there, mother, in your country?"

  "What news, lad? You see our queen was kept in prison
  by Koshchei the Deathless. Her three sons went to look for
  her, and two of them found her and came back, but the third,
  Prince Ivan, has disappeared, and no one knows where he is.
  The King is very unhappy about him. And those two Princes
  and their mother brought a certain Princess back with them;
  and the eldest son wants to marry her, but she declares he must
  fetch her her betrothal ring first, or get one made just as she
  wants it. But although they have made a public proclamation
  about it, no one has been found to do it yet."

  "Well, mother, go and tell the King that you will make one.
  I'll manage it for you," said Prince Ivan.

  So the old woman immediately dressed herself, and hastened
  to the King, and said:

  "Please, your Majesty, I will make the wedding ring."

  "Make it, then, make it, mother! Such people as you are
  welcome," said the king. "But if you don't make it, off goes
  your head!"

  The old woman was dreadfully frightened; she ran home,
  and told Prince Ivan to set to work at the ring. But Ivan lay
  down to sleep, troubling himself very little about it. The ring
  was there all the time. So he only laughed at the old woman,
  but she was trembling all over, and crying, and scolding him.

  "As for you," she said, "you're out of the scrape; but you've
  done for me, fool that I was!"

  The old woman cried and cried until she fell asleep. Early in
  the morning Prince Ivan got up and awakened her, saying:

  "Get up, mother, and go out! take them the ring, and mind,
  don't accept more than one ducat for it. If anyone asks who
  made the ring, say you made it yourself; don't say a word about
  me."

  The old woman was overjoyed and carried off the ring. The
  bride was delighted with it.

  "Just what I wanted," she said. So they gave the old woman
  a dish full of gold, but she took only one ducat.

  "Why do you take so little?" said the king.

  "What good would a lot do me, your Majesty? if I want some
  more afterwards, you'll give it me."

  Having said this the old woman went away.

  Time passed, and the news spread abroad that the bride had
  told her lover to fetch her her wedding-dress or else to get one
  made, just such a one as she wanted. Well, the old woman,
  thanks to Prince Ivan's aid, succeeded in this matter too, and
  took her the wedding-dress. And afterwards she took her the
  seamless shoes also, and would only accept one ducat each time
  and always said that she had made the things herself.

  Well, the people heard that there would be a wedding at the
  palace on such-and-such a day. And the day they all anxiously
  awaited came at last. Then Prince Ivan said to the old woman:

  "Look here, mother! when the bride is just going to be
  married, let me know."

  The old woman didn't let the time go by unheeded.

  Then Ivan immediately put on his princely raiment, and went
  out of the house.

  "See, mother, this is what I'm really like!" says he.

  The old woman fell at his feet.

  "Pray forgive me for scolding you," said she.

  "God be with you," said he.[116]

  So he went into the church and, finding his brothers had not
  yet arrived, he stood up alongside of the bride and got married
  to her. Then he and she were escorted back to the palace, and
  as they went along, the proper bridegroom, his eldest brother,
  met them. But when he saw that his bride and Prince Ivan were
  being escorted home together, he turned back again ignominiously.

  As to the king, he was delighted to see Prince Ivan again,
  and when he had learnt all about the treachery of his brothers,
  after the wedding feast had been solemnized, he banished the
  two elder princes, but he made Ivan heir to the throne.

In the story of "Prince Arikad,"[117] the Queen-Mother is carried off
by the Whirlwind,[118] instead of by Koshchei. Her youngest son climbs
the hill by the aid of iron hooks, kills Vikhor, and lowers his mother
and three other ladies whom he has rescued, by means of a rope made of
strips of hide. This his brothers cut to prevent him from
descending.[119] They then oblige the ladies to swear not to betray
them, the taking of the oath being accompanied by the eating of
earth.[120] The same formality is observed in another story in which
an oath of a like kind is exacted.[121]

The sacred nature of such an obligation may account for the singular
reticence so often maintained, under similar circumstances, in stories
of this class.

In one of the descriptions of Koshchei's death, he is said to be
killed by a blow on the forehead inflicted by the mysterious egg--that
last link in the magic chain by which his life is darkly bound.[122]
In another version of the same story, but told of a Snake, the fatal
blow is struck by a small stone found in the yolk of an egg, which is
inside a duck, which is inside a hare, which is inside a stone, which
is on an island [_i.e._, the fabulous island Buyan].[123] In another
variant[124] Koshchei attempts to deceive his fair captive, pretending
that his "death" resides in a besom, or in a fence, both of which she
adorns with gold in token of her love. Then he confesses that his
"death" really lies in an egg, inside a duck, inside a log which is
floating on the sea. Prince Ivan gets hold of the egg and shifts it
from one hand to the other. Koshchei rushes wildly from side to side
of the room. At last the prince breaks the egg. Koshchei falls on the
floor and dies.

This heart-breaking episode occurs in the folk-tales of many
lands.[125] It may not be amiss to trace it through some of its forms.
In a Norse story[126] a Giant's heart lies in an egg, inside a duck,
which swims in a well, in a church, on an island. With this may be
compared another Norse tale,[127] in which a _Haugebasse_, or Troll,
who has carried off a princess, informs her that he and all his
companions will burst asunder when above them passes "the grain of
sand that lies under the ninth tongue in the ninth head" of a certain
dead dragon. The grain of sand is found and brought, and the result is
that the whole of the monstrous brood of Trolls or _Haugebasser_ is
instantaneously destroyed. In a Transylvanian-Saxon story[128] a
Witch's "life" is a light which burns in an egg, inside a duck, which
swims on a pond, inside a mountain, and she dies when it is put out.
In the Bohemian story of "The Sun-horse"[129] a Warlock's "strength"
lies in an egg, which is within a duck, which is within a stag, which
is under a tree. A Seer finds the egg and sucks it. Then the Warlock
becomes as weak as a child, "for all his strength had passed into the
Seer." In the Gaelic story of "The Sea-Maiden,"[130] the "great beast
with three heads" which haunts the loch cannot be killed until an egg
is broken, which is in the mouth of a trout, which springs out of a
crow, which flies out of a hind, which lives on an island in the
middle of the loch. In a Modern Greek tale the life of a dragon or
other baleful being comes to an end simultaneously with the lives of
three pigeons which are shut up in an all but inaccessible
chamber,[131] or inclosed within a wild boar.[132] Closely connected
with the Greek tale is the Servian story of the dragon[133] whose
"strength" (_snaga_) lies in a sparrow, which is inside a dove, inside
a hare, inside a boar, inside a dragon (_ajdaya_) which is in a lake,
near a royal city. The hero of the story fights the dragon of the
lake, and after a long struggle, being invigorated at the critical
moment by a kiss which the heroine imprints on his forehead--he flings
it high in the air. When it falls to the ground it breaks in pieces,
and out comes the boar. Eventually the hero seizes the sparrow and
wrings its neck, but not before he has obtained from it the charm
necessary for the recovery of his missing brothers and a number of
other victims of the dragon's cruelty.

To these European tales a very interesting parallel is afforded by
the Indian story of "Punchkin,"[134] whose life depends on that of a
parrot, which is in a cage placed beneath the lowest of six jars of
water, piled one on the other, and standing in the midst of a desolate
country covered with thick jungle. When the parrot's legs and wings
are pulled off, Punchkin loses his legs and arms; and when its neck is
wrung, his head twists round and he dies.

One of the strangest of the stories which turn on this idea of an
external heart is the Samoyed tale,[135] in which seven brothers are
in the habit, every night, of taking out their hearts and sleeping
without them. A captive damsel whose mother they have killed, receives
the extracted hearts and hangs them on the tent-pole, where they
remain till the following morning. One night her brother contrives to
get the hearts into his possession. Next morning he takes them into
the tent, where he finds the brothers at the point of death. In vain
do they beg for their hearts, which he flings on the floor. "And as he
flings down the hearts the brothers die."

The legend to which I am now about to refer will serve as a proof of
the venerable antiquity of the myth from which the folk-tales, which
have just been quoted, appear to have sprung. A papyrus, which is
supposed to be "of the age of the nineteenth dynasty, about B.C.
1300," has preserved an Egyptian tale about two brothers. The younger
of these, Satou, leaves the elder, Anepou (Anubis) and retires to the
Valley of the Acacia. But, before setting off, Satou states that he
shall take his heart and place it "in the flowers of the acacia-tree,"
so that, if the tree is cut down, his heart will fall to the ground
and he will die. Having given Anepou instructions what to do in such a
case, he seeks the valley. There he hunts wild animals by day, and at
night he sleeps under the acacia-tree on which his heart rests. But at
length Noum, the Creator, forms a wife for him, and all the other gods
endow her with gifts. To this Egyptian Pandora Satou confides the
secret of his heart. One day a tress of her perfumed hair floats down
the river, and is taken to the King of Egypt. He determines to make
its owner his queen, and she, like Rhodope or Cinderella, is sought
for far and wide. When she has been found and brought to the king, she
recommends him to have the acacia cut down, so as to get rid of her
lawful husband. Accordingly the tree is cut down, the heart falls, and
Satou dies.

About this time Anepou sets out to pay his long-lost brother a visit.
Finding him dead, he searches for his heart, but searches in vain for
three years. In the fourth year, however, it suddenly becomes desirous
of returning to Egypt, and says, "I will leave this celestial sphere."
Next day Anepou finds it under the acacia, and places it in a vase
which contains some mystic fluid. When the heart has become saturated
with the moisture, the corpse shudders and opens its eyes. Anepou
pours the rest of the fluid down its throat, the heart returns to its
proper place, and Satou is restored to life.[136]

In one of the Skazkas, a _volshebnitsa_ or enchantress is introduced,
whose "death," like that of Koshchei, is spoken of as something
definite and localized. A prince has loved and lost a princess, who is
so beautiful that no man can look at her without fainting. Going in
search of her, he comes to the home of an enchantress, who invites him
to tea and gives him leave to inspect her house. As he wanders about
he comes to a cellar in which "he sees that beautiful one whom he
loves, in fire." She tells him her love for him has brought her there;
and he learns that there is no hope of freeing her unless he can find
out "where lies the death of the enchantress." So that evening he asks
his hostess about it, and she replies:

"In a certain lake stands a blue rose-tree. It is in a deep place, and
no man can reach unto it. My death is there."

He sets out in search of it, and, aided by a magic ring, reaches the
lake, "and sees there the blue rose-tree, and around it a blue
forest." After several failures, he succeeds in plucking up the
rose-tree by the roots, whereupon the enchantress straightway sickens.
He returns to her house, finds her at the point of death, and throws
the rose-bush into the cellar where his love is crying, "Behold her
death!" and immediately the whole building shakes to its
foundations--"and becomes an island, on which are people who had been
sitting in Hell, and who offer up thanks to Prince Ivan."[137]

In another Russian story,[138] a prince is grievously tormented by a
witch who has got hold of his heart, and keeps it perpetually seething
in a magic cauldron. In a third,[139] a "Queen-Maiden" falls in love
with the young Ivan, and, after being betrothed to him, would fain
take him away to her own land and marry him. But his stepmother throws
him into a magic slumber, and the Queen-Maiden has to return home
without him. When he awakes, and learns that she has gone, he sorrows
greatly, and sets out in search of her. At last he learns from a
friendly witch that his betrothed no longer cares for him, "her love
is hidden far away." It seems "that on the other side of the ocean
stands an oak, and on the oak a coffer, and in the coffer a hare, and
in the hare a duck, and in the duck an egg, and in the egg the love of
the Queen-Maiden." Ivan gets possession of the egg, and the friendly
witch contrives to have it placed before the Queen-Maiden at dinner.
She eats it, and immediately her love for Ivan returns in all its
pristine force. He appears, and she, overjoyed, carries him off to her
own land and there marries him.

       *       *       *       *       *

After this digression we will now return to our Snakes. All the
monstrous forms which figure in the stories we have just been
considering appear to be merely different species of the great serpent
family. Such names as Koshchei, Chudo Yudo, Usuinya, and the like,
seem to admit of exchange at the will of the story-teller with that of
Zméï Goruinuich, the many-headed Snake, who in Russian storyland is
represented as the type of all that is evil. But in the actual Russia
of to-day, snakes bear by no means so bad a character. Their presence
in a cottage is considered a good omen by the peasants, who leave out
milk for them to drink, and who think that to kill such visitors would
be a terrible sin.[140] This is probably a result of some remembrance
of a religious cultus paid to the household gods under the form of
snakes, such as existed of old, according to Kromer, in Poland and
Lithuania. The following story is more in keeping with such ideas as
these, than with those which are expressed in the tales about Koshchei
and his kin.


  THE WATER SNAKE.[141]

  There was once an old woman who had a daughter; and her
  daughter went down to the pond one day to bathe with the
  other girls. They all stripped off their shifts, and went into the
  water. Then there came a snake out of the water, and glided on
  to the daughter's shift. After a time the girls all came out, and
  began to put on their shifts, and the old woman's daughter wanted
  to put on hers, but there was the snake lying on it. She tried
  to drive him away, but there he stuck and would not move. Then
  the snake said:

  "If you'll marry me, I'll give you back your shift."

  Now she wasn't at all inclined to marry him, but the other
  girls said:

  "As if it were possible for you to be married to him! Say
  you will!" So she said, "Very well, I will." Then the snake
  glided off from the shift, and went straight into the water. The
  girl dressed and went home. And as soon as she got there,
  she said to her mother,

  "Mammie, mammie, thus and thus, a snake got upon my
  shift, and says he, 'Marry me or I won't let you have your shift;'
  and I said, 'I will.'"

  "What nonsense are you talking, you little fool! as if one
  could marry a snake!"

  And so they remained just as they were, and forgot all about
  the matter.

  A week passed by, and one day they saw ever so many snakes,
  a huge troop of them, wriggling up to their cottage. "Ah,
  mammie, save me, save me!" cried the girl, and her mother
  slammed the door and barred the entrance as quickly as possible.
  The snakes would have rushed in at the door, but the door was
  shut; they would have rushed into the passage, but the passage
  was closed. Then in a moment they rolled themselves into a
  ball, flung themselves at the window, smashed it to pieces, and
  glided in a body into the room. The girl got upon the stove, but
  they followed her, pulled her down, and bore her out of the room
  and out of doors. Her mother accompanied her, crying like
  anything.

  They took the girl down to the pond, and dived right into the
  water with her. And there they all turned into men and women.
  The mother remained for some time on the dike, wailed a little,
  and then went home.

  Three years went by. The girl lived down there, and had
  two children, a son and a daughter. Now she often entreated
  her husband to let her go to see her mother. So at last one day
  he took her up to the surface of the water, and brought her
  ashore. But she asked him before leaving him,

  "What am I to call out when I want you?"

  "Call out to me, 'Osip, [Joseph] Osip, come here!' and I
  will come," he replied.

  Then he dived under water again, and she went to her
  mother's, carrying her little girl on one arm, and leading her boy
  by the hand. Out came her mother to meet her--was so
  delighted to see her!

  "Good day, mother!" said the daughter.

  "Have you been doing well while you were living down
  there?" asked her mother.

  "Very well indeed, mother. My life there is better than
  yours here."

  They sat down for a bit and chatted. Her mother got
  dinner ready for her, and she dined.

  "What's your husband's name?" asked her mother.

  "Osip," she replied.

  "And how are you to get home?"

  "I shall go to the dike, and call out, 'Osip, Osip, come
  here!' and he'll come."

  "Lie down, daughter, and rest a bit," said the mother.

  So the daughter lay down and went to sleep. The mother
  immediately took an axe and sharpened it, and went down to the
  dike with it. And when she came to the dike, she began calling
  out,

  "Osip, Osip, come here!"

  No sooner had Osip shown his head than the old woman
  lifted her axe and chopped it off. And the water in the pond
  became dark with blood.

  The old woman went home. And when she got home her
  daughter awoke.

  "Ah! mother," says she, "I'm getting tired of being here; I'll
  go home."

  "Do sleep here to-night, daughter; perhaps you won't have
  another chance of being with me."

  So the daughter stayed and spent the night there. In the
  morning she got up and her mother got breakfast ready for her;
  she breakfasted, and then she said good-bye to her mother and
  went away, carrying her little girl in her arms, while her boy
  followed behind her. She came to the dike, and called out:

  "Osip, Osip, come here!"

  She called and called, but he did not come.

  Then she looked into the water, and there she saw a head
  floating about. Then she guessed what had happened.

  "Alas! my mother has killed him!" she cried.

  There on the bank she wept and wailed. And then to her
  girl she cried:

  "Fly about as a wren, henceforth and evermore!"

  And to her boy she cried:

  "Fly about as a nightingale, my boy, henceforth and evermore!"

  "But I," she said, "will fly about as a cuckoo, crying
  'Cuckoo!' henceforth and evermore!"

      [Stories about serpent-spouses are by no means
      uncommon, but I can find no parallel to the above so
      far as the termination is concerned. Benfey quotes or
      refers to a great number of the transformation tales
      in which a husband or a wife appears at times in the
      form of a snake (Panchatantra, i. pp. 254-7 266-7).
      Sometimes, when a husband of this kind has doffed his
      serpent's skin, his wife seizes it, and throws it into
      the fire. Her act generally proves to be to her
      advantage, as well as to his, but not always. On a
      story of this kind was doubtless founded the legend
      handed down to us by Appuleius of Cupid and Psyche.
      Among its wildest versions are the Albanian
      "Schlangenkind" (Hahn, No. 100), a very similar
      Roumanian tale (Ausland 1857, No. 43, quoted by
      Benfey), the Wallachian Trandafíru (Schott, No. 23, in
      which the husband is a pumpkin (_Kürbiss_) by day),
      and the second of the Servian tales of the
      Snake-Husband (Vuk Karajich, No. 10).]

The snakes which figure in this weird story, the termination of which
is so unusually tragic, bear a strong resemblance to the Indian Nágas,
the inhabitants of Patala or the underground world, serpents which
take at will the human shape and often mix with mortals. They may,
also, be related to the mermen and mermaids of the sea-coasts, and to
the similar beings with which, under various names, tradition peoples
the lakes, and streams, and fountains of Europe. The South-Russian
peasantry have from immemorial times maintained a firm belief in the
existence of water-nymphs, called Rusalkas, closely resembling the
Nereids of Modern Greece, the female Nixies of the North of Europe,
and throughout the whole of Russia, at least in outlying districts,
there still lingers a sort of cultus of certain male water-sprites who
bear the name of Vodyanies, and who are almost identical with the
beings who haunt the waters of various countries--such as the German
_Nix_, the Swedish _Nek_, the Finnish _Näkke_, etc.[142]

In the Skazkas we find frequent mention of beauteous maidens who
usually live beneath the wave, but who can transform themselves into
birds and fly wherever they please. We may perhaps be allowed to
designate them by the well-known name of Swan-Maidens, though they do
not always assume, together with their plumage-robes, the form of
swans, but sometimes appear as geese, ducks, spoonbills, or aquatic
birds of some other species. They are, for the most part, the
daughters of the Morskoi Tsar, or Water King--a being who plays an
important part in Slavonic popular fiction. He is of a somewhat
shadowy form, and his functions are not very clearly defined, for the
part he usually fills is sometimes allotted to Koshchei or to the
Snake, but the stories generally represent him as a patriarchal
monarch, living in subaqueous halls of light and splendor, whence he
emerges at times to seize a human victim. It is generally a boy whom
he gets into his power, and who eventually obtains the hand of one of
his daughters, and escapes with her to the upper world, though not
without considerable difficulty. Such are, for instance, the leading
incidents in the following skazka, many features of which closely
resemble those of various well-known West-European folk-tales.


  THE WATER KING AND VASILISSA THE WISE.[143]

  Once upon a time there lived a King and Queen, and the King
  was very fond of hunting and shooting. Well one day he went
  out hunting, and he saw an Eaglet sitting on an oak. But just
  as he was going to shoot at it the Eaglet began to entreat him,
  crying:--

  "Don't shoot me, my lord King! better take me home with
  you; some time or other I shall be of service to you."

  The King reflected awhile and said, "How can you be of use
  to me?" and again he was going to shoot.

  Then the Eaglet said to him a second time:--

  "Don't shoot me, my lord King! better take me home with
  you; some time or other I shall be of use to you."

  The King thought and thought, but couldn't imagine a bit the
  more what use the Eaglet could be to him, and so he determined
  to shoot it. Then a third time the Eaglet exclaimed:--

  "Don't shoot me, my lord King! better take me home with
  you and feed me for three years. Some time or other I shall be
  of service to you!"

  The King relented, took the Eaglet home with him, and fed
  it for a year, for two years. But it ate so much that it devoured
  all his cattle. The King had neither a cow nor a sheep left. At
  length the Eagle said:--

  "Now let me go free!"

  The King set it at liberty; the Eagle began trying its wings.
  But no, it could not fly yet! So it said:--

  "Well, my lord King! you have fed me two years; now,
  whether you like it or no, feed me for one year more. Even if
  you have to borrow, at all events feed me; you won't lose by it!"

  Well, this is what the King did. He borrowed cattle from
  everywhere round about, and he fed the Eagle for the space of a
  whole year, and afterwards he set it at liberty. The Eagle rose
  ever so high, flew and flew, then dropt down again to the earth
  and said:--

  "Now then, my lord King! Take a seat on my back! we'll
  have a fly together?"

  The King got on the Eagle's back. Away they went flying.
  Before very long they reached the blue sea. Then the Eagle
  shook off the King, who fell into the sea, and sank up to his
  knees. But the Eagle didn't let him drown! it jerked him on to
  its wing, and asked:--

  "How now, my lord King! were you frightened, perchance?"

  "I was," said the King; "I thought I was going to be drowned
  outright!"

  Again they flew and flew till they reached another sea. The
  Eagle shook off the King right in the middle of the sea; the King
  sank up to his girdle. The Eagle jerked him on to its wing
  again, and asked:--

  "Well, my lord King, were you frightened, perchance?"

  "I was," he replied, "but all the time I thought, 'Perhaps,
  please God, the creature will pull me out.'"

  Away they flew again, flew, and arrived at a third sea. The
  Eagle dropped the King into a great gulf, so that he sank right
  up to his neck. And the third time the Eagle jerked him on to
  its wing, and asked:--

  "Well, my lord King! Were you frightened, perchance?"

  "I was," says the King, "but still I said to myself, 'Perhaps
  it will pull me out.'"

  "Well, my lord King! now you have felt what the fear of
  death is like! What I have done was in payment of an old score.
  Do you remember my sitting on an oak, and your wanting to
  shoot me? Three times you were going to let fly, but I kept on
  entreating you not to shoot, saying to myself all the time, 'Perhaps
  he won't kill me; perhaps he'll relent and take me home
  with him!'"

  Afterwards they flew beyond thrice nine lands: long, long
  did they fly. Says the Eagle, "Look, my lord King! what is
  above us and what below us?"

  The King looked.

  "Above us," he says, "is the sky, below us the earth."

  "Look again; what is on the right hand and on the left?"

  "On the right hand is an open plain, on the left stands a
  house."

  "We will fly thither," said the Eagle; "my youngest sister
  lives there."

  They went straight into the courtyard. The sister came out
  to meet them, received her brother cordially, and seated him at
  the oaken table. But on the King she would not so much as
  look, but left him outside, loosed greyhounds, and set them at
  him. The Eagle was exceedingly wroth, jumped up from table,
  seized the King, and flew away with him again.

  Well, they flew and flew. Presently the Eagle said to the
  King, "Look round; what is behind us?"

  The King turned his head, looked, and said, "Behind us is a
  red house."

  "That is the house of my youngest sister--on fire, because
  she did not receive you, but set greyhounds at you."

  They flew and flew. Again the Eagle asked:

  "Look again, my lord King; what is above us, and what
  below us?"

  "Above us is the sky, below us the earth."

  "Look and see what is on the right hand and on the left."

  "On the right is the open plain, on the left there stands a
  house."

  "There lives my second sister; we'll go and pay her a visit."

  They stopped in a wide courtyard. The second sister received
  her brother cordially, and seated him at the oaken table; but the
  King was left outside, and she loosed greyhounds, and set them
  at him. The Eagle flew into a rage, jumped up from table,
  caught up the King, and flew away farther with him. They flew
  and flew. Says the Eagle:

  "My lord King! look round! what is behind us?"

  The King looked back.

  "There stands behind us a red house."

  "That's my second sister's house burning!" said the Eagle.
  "Now we'll fly to where my mother and my eldest sister live."

  Well, they flew there. The Eagle's mother and eldest sister
  were delighted to see them, and received the King with cordiality
  and respect.

  "Now, my lord King," said the Eagle, "tarry awhile with
  us, and afterwards I will give you a ship, and will repay you for
  all I ate in your house, and then--God speed you home again!"

  So the Eagle gave the King a ship and two coffers--the one
  red, the other green--and said:

  "Mind now! don't open the coffers until you get home.
  Then open the red coffer in the back court, and the green coffer
  in the front court."

  The King took the coffers, parted with the Eagle, and sailed
  along the blue sea. Presently he came to a certain island, and
  there his ship stopped. He landed on the shore, and began
  thinking about the coffers, and wondering whatever there could
  be in them, and why the Eagle had told him not to open them.
  He thought and thought, and at last couldn't hold out any more--he
  longed so awfully to know all about it. So he took the red
  coffer, set it on the ground, and opened it--and out of it came
  such a quantity of different kinds of cattle that there was no
  counting them: the island had barely room enough for them.

  When the King saw that, he became exceedingly sorrowful,
  and began to weep and therewithal to say:

  "What is there now left for me to do? how shall I get all
  this cattle back into so little a coffer?"

  Lo! there came out of the water a man--came up to him, and
  asked:

  "Wherefore are you weeping so bitterly, O lord King?"

  "How can I help weeping!" answers the King. "How
  shall I be able to get all this great herd into so small a coffer?"

  "If you like, I will set your mind at rest. I will pack up all
  your cattle for you. But on one condition only. You must give
  me whatever you have at home that you don't know of."

  The King reflected.

  "Whatever is there at home that I don't know of?" says he.
  "I fancy I know about everything that's there."

  He reflected, and consented. "Pack them up," says he. "I
  will give you whatever I have at home that I know nothing
  about."

  So that man packed away all his cattle for him in the coffer.
  The King went on board ship and sailed away homewards.

  When he reached home, then only did he learn that a son
  had been born to him. And he began kissing the child, caressing
  it, and at the same time bursting into such floods of tears!

  "My lord King!" says the Queen, "tell me wherefore thou
  droppest bitter tears?"

  "For joy!" he replies.

  He was afraid to tell her the truth, that the Prince would
  have to be given up. Afterwards he went into the back court,
  opened the red coffer, and thence issued oxen and cows, sheep
  and rams; there were multitudes of all sorts of cattle, so that
  all the sheds and pastures were crammed full. He went into
  the front court, opened the green coffer, and there appeared a
  great and glorious garden. What trees there were in it to be
  sure! The King was so delighted that he forgot all about
  giving up his son.

  Many years went by. One day the King took it into his
  head to go for a stroll, and he came to a river. At that moment
  the same man he had seen before came out of the water, and
  said:

  "You've pretty soon become forgetful, lord King! Think a
  little! surely you're in my debt!"

  The King returned home full of grief, and told all the truth to
  the Queen and the Prince. They all mourned and wept together,
  but they decided that there was no help for it, the Prince must
  be given up. So they took him to the mouth of the river and
  there they left him alone.

  The Prince looked around, saw a footpath, and followed
  trusting God would lead him somewhere. He walked and walked,
  and came to a dense forest: in the forest stood a hut, in the
  hut lived a Baba Yaga.

  "Suppose I go in," thought the Prince, and went in.

  "Good day, Prince!" said the Baba Yaga. "Are you seeking
  work or shunning work?"

  "Eh, granny! First give me to eat and to drink, and then ask
  me questions."

  So she gave him food and drink, and the Prince told her
  everything as to whither he was going and with what purpose.

  Then the Baba Yaga said: "Go, my child, to the sea-shore;
  there will fly thither twelve spoonbills, which will turn into fair
  maidens, and begin bathing; do you steal quietly up and lay
  your hands on the eldest maiden's shift. When you have come
  to terms with her, go to the Water King, and there will meet
  you on the way Obédalo and Opivalo, and also Moroz Treskum[144]--take
  all of them with you; they will do you good service."

  The Prince bid the Yaga farewell, went to the appointed spot
  on the sea-shore, and hid behind the bushes. Presently twelve
  spoonbills came flying thither, struck the moist earth, turned
  into fair maidens, and began to bathe. The Prince stole the
  eldest one's shift, and sat down behind a bush--didn't budge
  an inch. The girls finished bathing and came out on the shore:
  eleven of them put on their shifts, turned into birds, and
  flew away home. There remained only the eldest, Vasilissa the
  Wise. She began praying and begging the good youth:

  "Do give me my shift!" she says. "You are on your way
  to the house of my father, the Water King. When you come
  I will do you good service."

  So the Prince gave her back her shift, and she immediately
  turned into a spoonbill and flew away after her companions.
  The Prince went further on; there met him by the way three
  heroes--Obédalo, Opivalo, and Moroz Treskum; he took them
  with him and went on to the Water King's.

  The Water King saw him, and said:

  "Hail, friend! why have you been so long in coming to me?
  I have grown weary of waiting for you. Now set to work.
  Here is your first task. Build me in one night a great crystal
  bridge, so that it shall be ready for use to-morrow. If you don't
  build it--off goes your head!"

  The Prince went away from the Water King, and burst into a
  flood of tears. Vasilissa the Wise opened the window of her
  upper chamber, and asked:

  "What are you crying about, Prince?"

  "Ah! Vasilissa the Wise! how can I help crying? Your
  father has ordered me to build a crystal bridge in a single night,
  and I don't even know how to handle an axe."

  "No matter! lie down and sleep; the morning is wiser than
  the evening."

  She ordered him to sleep, but she herself went out on the
  steps, and called aloud with a mighty whistling cry. Then from
  all sides there ran together carpenters and workmen; one
  levelled the ground, another carried bricks. Soon had they
  built a crystal bridge, and traced cunning devices on it; and then
  they dispersed to their homes.

  Early next morning Vasilissa the Wise awoke the Prince:

  "Get up, Prince! the bridge is ready: my father will be
  coming to inspect it directly."

  Up jumped the Prince, seized a broom, took his place on the
  bridge, and began sweeping here, clearing up there.

  The Water King bestowed praise upon him:

  "Thanks!" says he. "You've done me one service: now
  do another. Here is your task. Plant me by to-morrow a
  garden green--a big and shady one; and there must be birds
  singing in the garden, and flowers blossoming on the trees, and
  ripe apples and pears hanging from the boughs."

  Away went the Prince from the Water King, all dissolved in
  tears. Vasilissa the Wise opened her window and asked:

  "What are you crying for, Prince?"

  "How can I help crying? Your father has ordered me to
  plant a garden in one night!"

  "That's nothing! lie down and sleep: the morning is wiser
  than the evening."

  She made him go to sleep, but she herself went out on the
  steps, called and whistled with a mighty whistle. From every
  side there ran together gardeners of all sorts, and they planted
  a garden green, and in the garden birds sang, on the trees
  flowers blossomed, from the boughs hung ripe apples and pears.

  Early in the morning Vasilissa the Wise awoke the Prince:

  "Get up, Prince! the garden is ready: Papa is coming to
  see it."

  The Prince immediately snatched up a broom, and was off to
  the garden. Here he swept a path, there he trained a twig.
  The Water King praised him and said:

  "Thanks, Prince! You've done me right trusty service. So
  choose yourself a bride from among my twelve daughters. They
  are all exactly alike in face, in hair, and in dress. If you can
  pick out the same one three times running, she shall be your
  wife; if you fail to do so, I shall have you put to death."

  Vasilissa the Wise knew all about that, so she found time to
  say to the Prince:

  "The first time I will wave my handkerchief, the second I
  will be arranging my dress, the third time you will see a fly
  above my head."

  And so the Prince guessed which was Vasilissa the Wise
  three times running. And he and she were married, and a wedding
  feast was got ready.

  Now the Water King had prepared much food of all sorts
  more than a hundred men could get through. And he ordered
  his son-in-law to see that everything was eaten. "If anything
  remains over, the worse for you!" says he.

  "My Father," begs the Prince, "there's an old fellow of
  mine here; please let him take a snack with us."

  "Let him come!"

  Immediately appeared Obédalo--ate up everything, and
  wasn't content then! The Water King next set out two score
  tubs of all kinds of strong drinks, and ordered his son-in-law to
  see that they were all drained dry.

  "My Father!" begs the Prince again, "there's another old
  man of mine here, let him, too, drink your health."

  "Let him come!"

  Opivalo appeared, emptied all the forty tubs in a twinkling,
  and then asked for a drop more by way of stirrup-cup.[145]

  The Water King saw that there was nothing to be gained that
  way, so he gave orders to prepare a bath-room for the young
  couple--an iron bath-room--and to heat it as hot as possible.
  So the iron bath-room was made hot. Twelve loads of firewood
  were set alight, and the stove and the walls were made
  red-hot--impossible to come within five versts of it.

  "My Father!" says the Prince; "let an old fellow of ours
  have a scrub first, just to try the bath-room."

  "Let him do so!"

  Moroz Treskum went into the bath room, blew into one corner,
  blew in another--in a moment icicles were hanging there.
  After him the young couple also went into the bath-room, were
  lathered and scrubbed,[146] and then went home.

  After a time Vasilissa said to the Prince, "Let us get out of
  my father's power. He's tremendously angry with you; perhaps
  he'll be doing you some hurt."

  "Let us go," says the Prince.

  Straightway they saddled their horses and galloped off into
  the open plain. They rode and rode; many an hour went by.

  "Jump down from your horse, Prince, and lay your ear close
  to the earth," said Vasilissa. "Cannot you hear a sound as of
  pursuers?"

  The prince bent his ear to the ground, but he could hear nothing.
  Then Vasilissa herself lighted down from her good
  steed, laid herself flat on the earth, and said: "Ah Prince! I hear
  a great noise as of chasing after us." Then she turned the
  horses into a well, and herself into a bowl, and the Prince into
  an old, very old man. Up came the pursuers.

  "Heigh, old man!" say they, "haven't you seen a youth and
  a maiden pass by?"

  "I saw them, my friends! only it was a long while ago. I was
  a youngster at the time when they rode by."

  The pursuers returned to the Water King.

  "There is no trace of them," they said, "no news: all we
  saw was an old man beside a well, and a bowl floating on the
  water."

  "Why did not ye seize them?" cried the Water King, who
  thereupon put the pursuers to a cruel death, and sent another
  troop after the Prince and Vasilissa the Wise.

  The fugitives in the mean time had ridden far, far away.
  Vasilissa the Wise heard the noise made by the fresh set of
  pursuers, so she turned the Prince into an old priest, and she
  herself became an ancient church. Scarcely did its walls hold
  together, covered all over with moss. Presently up came the
  pursuers.

  "Heigh, old man! haven't you seen a youth and a maiden
  pass by?"

  "I saw them, my own! only it was long, ever so long ago. I
  was a young man when they rode by. It was just while I was
  building this church."

  So the second set of pursuers returned to the Water King,
  saying:

  "There is neither trace nor news of them, your Royal Majesty.
  All that we saw was an old priest and an ancient church."

  "Why did not ye seize them?" cried the Water King louder
  than before, and having put the pursuers to a cruel death, he
  galloped off himself in pursuit of the Prince and Vasilissa the
  Wise. This time Vasilissa turned the horses into a river of
  honey with _kissel_[147] banks, and changed the Prince into a Drake
  and herself into a grey duck. The Water King flung himself
  on the _kissel_ and honey-water, and ate and ate, and drank and
  drank until he burst! And so he gave up the ghost.

  The Prince and Vasilissa rode on, and at length they drew
  nigh to the home of the Prince's parents. Then said Vasilissa,

  "Go on in front, Prince, and report your arrival to your
  father and mother. But I will wait for you here by the wayside.
  Only remember these words of mine: kiss everyone
  else, only don't kiss your sister; if you do, you will forget me."

  The Prince reached home, began saluting every one, kissed
  his sister too--and no sooner had he kissed her than from that
  very moment he forgot all about his wife, just as if she had
  never entered into his mind.

  Three days did Vasilissa the Wise await him. On the fourth
  day she clad herself like a beggar, went into the capital, and
  took up her quarters in an old woman's house. But the Prince
  was preparing to marry a rich Princess, and orders were given
  to proclaim throughout the kingdom, that all Christian people
  were to come to congratulate the bride and bridegroom, each
  one bringing a wheaten pie as a present. Well, the old woman
  with whom Vasilissa lodged, prepared, like everyone else, to
  sift flour and make a pie.

  "Why are you making a pie, granny?" asked Vasilissa.

  "Is it why? you evidently don't know then. Our King is
  giving his son in marriage to a rich princess: one must go to
  the palace to serve up the dinner to the young couple."

  "Come now! I, too, will bake a pie and take it to the
  palace; may be the King will make me some present."

  "Bake away in God's name!" said the old woman.

  Vasilissa took flour, kneaded dough, and made a pie. And
  inside it she put some curds and a pair of live doves.

  Well, the old woman and Vasilissa the Wise reached the
  palace just at dinner-time. There a feast was in progress, one
  fit for all the world to see. Vasilissa's pie was set on the table,
  but no sooner was it cut in two than out of it flew the two
  doves. The hen bird seized a piece of curd, and her mate said
  to her:

  "Give me some curds, too, Dovey!"

  "No I won't," replied the other dove: "else you'd forget
  me, as the Prince has forgotten his Vasilissa the Wise."

  Then the Prince remembered about his wife. He jumped
  up from table, caught her by her white hands, and seated her
  close by his side. From that time forward they lived together
  in all happiness and prosperity.

      [With this story may be compared a multitude of tales
      in very many languages. In German for instance, "Der
      König vom goldenen Berg," (Grimm, _KM._ No. 92. See
      also Nos. 51, 56, 113, 181, and the opening of No.
      31), "Der Königssohn und die Teufelstochter,"
      (Haltrich, No. 26), and "Grünus Kravalle" (Wolf's
      "Deutsche Hausmärchen," No. 29)--the Norse
      "Mastermaid," (Asbjörnsen and Moe, No. 46, Dasent, No.
      11) and "The Three Princesses of Whiteland," (A. and
      M. No. 9, Dasent, No. 26)--the Lithuanian story
      (Schleicher, No. 26, p. 75) in which a "field-devil"
      exacts from a farmer the promise of a child--the
      Wallachian stories (Schott, Nos. 2 and 15) in which a
      devil obtains a like promise from a woodcutter and a
      fisherman--the Modern Greek (Hahn, Nos. 4, 5, 54, and
      68) in which a child is promised to a Dervish, a
      _Drakos_, the Devil, and a Demon--and the Gaelic tales
      of "The Battle of the Birds" and "The Sea-maiden,"
      (Campbell, Nos. 2 and 4) in the former of which the
      child is promised to a Giant, in the latter to a
      Mermaid. The likeness between the Russian story and
      the "Battle of the Birds" is very striking. References
      to a great many other similar tales will be found in
      Grimm (_KM._ iii. pp. 96-7, and 168-9). The group to
      which all these stories belong is linked with a set of
      tales about a father who apprentices his son to a
      wizard, sometimes to the Devil, from whom the youth
      escapes with great difficulty. The principal Russian
      representative of the second set is called "Eerie
      Art," "Khitraya Nauka," (Afanasief, v. No. 22, vi. No.
      45, viii. p. 339).

      To the hero's adventures while with the Water King,
      and while escaping from him, an important parallel is
      offered by the end of the already mentioned (at p. 92)
      Indian story of Sringabhuja. That prince asks
      Agnisikha, the Rákshasa whom, in his crane-form, he
      has wounded, to bestow upon him the hand of his
      daughter--the maiden who had met him on his arrival at
      the Rákshasa's palace. The demon pretends to consent,
      but only on condition that the prince is able to pick
      out his love from among her numerous sisters. This
      Sringabhuja is able to do in spite of all the demon's
      daughters being exactly alike, as she has told him
      beforehand she will wear her pearls on her brow
      instead of round her neck. Her father will not remark
      the change, she says, for being of the demon race, he
      is not very sharp witted. The Rákshasa next sets the
      prince two of the usual tasks. He is to plough a great
      field, and sow a hundred bushels of corn. When this,
      by the daughter's help, is done, he is told to gather
      up the seed again. This also the demon's daughter does
      for him, sending to his aid a countless swarm of ants.
      Lastly he is commanded to visit the demon's brother
      and invite him to the wedding. He does so, and is
      pursued by the invited guest, from whom he escapes
      only by throwing behind him earth, water, thorns, and
      lastly fire, with all of which he has been provided by
      his love. They produce corresponding obstacles which
      enable him to get away from the uncle of his bride.
      The demon now believes that his proposed son-in-law
      must be a god in disguise, so he gives his consent to
      the marriage. All goes well for a time, but at last
      the prince wants to go home, so he and his wife fly
      from her father's palace. Agnisikha pursues them. She
      makes her husband invisible, while she assumes the
      form of a woodman. Up comes her angry sire, and asks
      for news of the fugitives. She replies she has seen
      none, her eyes being full of tears caused by the death
      of the Rákshasa prince Agnisikha. The slow-witted
      demon immediately flies home to find out whether he is
      really dead. Discovering that he is not, he renews the
      pursuit. Again his daughter renders her husband
      invisible, and assumes the form of a messenger
      carrying a letter. When her father arrives and repeats
      his question, she says she has seen no one: she is
      going with a letter to his brother from Agnisikha, who
      has just been mortally wounded. Back again home flies
      the demon in great distress, anxious to find out
      whether he has really been wounded to death or not.
      After settling this question, he leaves his daughter
      and her husband in peace. See Professor Brockhaus in
      the "Berichte der phil. hist. Classe der K. Sächs.
      Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften," 1861, pp. 226-9, and
      Professor Wilson, "Essays, &c.," ii. p. 136-8. Cf. R.
      Köhler in "Orient und Occident," ii. pp. 107-14.]

In another story a king is out hunting and becomes thirsty. Seeing a
spring near at hand, he bends down and is just going to lap up its
water, when the Tsar-Medvéd, a King-Bear, seizes him by the beard. The
king is unable to free himself from his grasp, and is obliged to
promise as his ransom "that which he knows not of at home," which
turns out to be a couple of children--a boy and a girl--who have been
born during his absence. In vain does he attempt to save the twins
from their impending fate, by concealing them in a secret abode
constructed for that purpose underground. In the course of time the
King-Bear arrives to claim them, finds out their hiding-place, digs
them up, and carries them off on his back to a distant region where no
man lives. During his absence they attempt to escape being carried
through the air on the back of a friendly falcon, but the King-Bear
sees them, "strikes his head against the earth, and burns the falcon's
wings." The twins fall to the ground, and are carried by the King-Bear
to his home amid inaccessible mountains. There they make a second
attempt at escape, trusting this time to an eagle's aid; but it meets
with exactly the same fate as their first trial. At last they are
rescued by a bull-calf, which succeeds in baffling all the King-Bear's
efforts to recover them. At the end of their perilous journey the
bull-calf tells the young prince to cut its throat, and burn its
carcase. He unwillingly consents, and from its ashes spring a horse, a
dog, and an apple-tree, all of which play important parts in the next
act of the drama.[148]

In one of the variants of the Water King story,[149] the seizer of
the drinking kings' beard is not called the _Morskoi Tsar_ but _Chudo
Morskoe_, a Water Chudo, whose name recalls to mind the Chudo Yudo we
have already met with.[150] The Prince who is obliged, in consequence
of his father's promise, to surrender himself to the Water Giant,
falls in love with a maiden whom he finds in that potentate's palace,
and who is an enchantress whom the Chudo has stolen. She turns herself
into a ring, which he carries about with him, and eventually, after
his escape from the Chudo, she becomes his bride.

In another story,[151] the being who obtains a child from one of the
incautious fathers of the Jephthah type who abound in popular fiction,
is of a very singular nature. A merchant is flying across a river on
the back of an eagle, when he drops a magic "snuff-box," which had
been entrusted to his charge by that bird, and it disappears beneath
the waters. At the eagle's command, the crayfish search for it, and
bring back word that it is lying "on the knees of an Idol." The eagle
summons the Idol, and demands the snuff box. Thereupon the Idol says
to the merchant--"Give me what you do not know of at home?" The
merchant agrees and the Idol gives him back his snuff-box.

In some of the variants of the story, the influence of ideas
connected with Christianity makes itself apparent in the names given
to the actors. Thus in the "Moujik and Anastasia Adovna,"[152] it is
no longer a king of the waters, but a devil's imp,[153] who bargains
with the thirsting father for his child, and the swan-maiden whose
shift the devoted youth steals bears the name of Adovna, the daughter
of Ad or Hades. In "The Youth,"[154] a moujik, who has lost his way in
a forest makes the rash promise to a man who enables him to cross a
great river; "and that man (says the story) was a devil."[155] We
shall meet with other instances further on of parents whose "hasty
words" condemn their children to captivity among evil spirits. In one
of the stories of this class,[156] the father is a hunter who is
perishing with cold one night, and who makes the usual promise as the
condition of his being allowed to warm himself at a fire guarded by a
devil. Being in consequence of this deprived of a son, he becomes very
sad, and drinks himself to death. "The priest will not bury his sinful
body, so it is thrust into a hole at a crossway," and he falls into
the power of "that very same devil," who turns him into a horse, and
uses him as a beast of burden. At last he is released by his son, who
has forced the devil to free him after several adventures--one of them
being a fight with the evil spirit in the shape of a three-headed
snake.

In the Hindoo story of "Brave Seventee Bai,"[157] that heroine kills
"a very large Cobra" which comes out of a lake. Touching the waters
with a magic diamond taken from the snake, she sees them roll back "in
a wall on either hand," between which she passes into a splendid
garden. In it she finds a lovely girl who proves to be the Cobra's
daughter and who is delighted to hear of her serpent-father's death.

Demon haunted waters, which prove fatal to mortals who bathe in or
drink of them, often occur in oriental fiction. In one of the Indian
stories, for instance,[158] a king is induced to order his escort to
bathe in a lake which is the abode of a Rákshasa or demon. They leap
into the water simultaneously, and are all devoured by the terrible
man-eater. From the assaults of such a Rákshasa as this it was that
Buddha, who was at the time a monkey, preserved himself and 80,000 of
his brother monkeys, by suggesting that they should drink from the
tank in which the demon lay in wait for them, "through reeds
previously made completely hollow by their breath."[159]

       *       *       *       *       *

From these male personifications of evil--from the Snake, Koshchei,
and the Water King--we will now turn to their corresponding female
forms. By far the most important beings of the latter class are those
malevolent enchantresses who form two closely related branches of the
same family. Like their sisters all over the world, they are, as a
general rule, old, hideous, and hateful. They possess all kinds of
supernatural powers, but their wits are often dull. They wage constant
war with mankind, but the heroes of storyland find them as easily
overcome as the males of their family. In their general character they
bear a strong resemblance to the Giantesses, Lamias, female Trolls,
Ogresses, Dragonesses, &c., of Europe, but in some of their traits
they differ from those well-known beings, and therefore they are
worthy of a detailed notice.

In several of the stories which have already been quoted, a prominent
part is played by the Baba Yaga, a female fiend whose name has given
rise to much philological discussion of a somewhat unsatisfactory
nature.[160] Her appearance is that of a tall, gaunt hag, with
dishevelled hair. Sometimes she is seen lying stretched out from one
corner to the other of a miserable hut, through the ceiling of which
passes her long iron nose; the hut is supported "by fowl's legs," and
stands at the edge of a forest towards which its entrance looks. When
the proper words are addressed to it, the hut revolves upon its
slender supports, so as to turn its back instead of its front to the
forest. Sometimes, as in the next story, the Baba Yaga appears as the
mistress of a mansion, which stands in a courtyard enclosed by a fence
made of dead men's bones. When she goes abroad she rides in a mortar,
which she urges on with a pestle, while she sweeps away the traces of
her flight with a broom. She is closely connected with the Snake in
different forms; in many stories, indeed, the leading part has been
ascribed by one narrator to a Snake and by another to a Baba Yaga. She
possesses the usual magic apparatus by which enchantresses work their
wonders; the Day and the Night (according to the following story) are
among her servants, the entire animal world lies at her disposal. On
the whole she is the most prominent among the strange figures with
which the Skazkas make us acquainted. Of the stories which especially
relate to her the following may be taken as a fair specimen.


  THE BABA YAGA.[161]

  Once upon a time there was an old couple. The husband lost
  his wife and married again. But he had a daughter by the first
  marriage, a young girl, and she found no favor in the eyes of
  her evil stepmother, who used to beat her, and consider how she
  could get her killed outright. One day the father went away
  somewhere or other, so the stepmother said to the girl, "Go to
  your aunt, my sister, and ask her for a needle and thread to make
  you a shift."

  Now that aunt was a Baba Yaga. Well, the girl was no fool,
  so she went to a real aunt of hers first, and says she:

  "Good morning, auntie!"

  "Good morning, my dear! what have you come for?"

  "Mother has sent me to her sister, to ask for a needle and
  thread to make me a shift."

  Then her aunt instructed her what to do. "There is a birch-tree
  there, niece, which would hit you in the eye--you must tie
  a ribbon round it; there are doors which would creak and bang--you
  must pour oil on their hinges; there are dogs which would
  tear you in pieces--you must throw them these rolls; there is a
  cat which would scratch your eyes out--you must give it a piece
  of bacon."

  So the girl went away, and walked and walked, till she came
  to the place. There stood a hut, and in it sat weaving the Baba
  Yaga, the Bony-shanks.

  "Good morning, auntie," says the girl.

  "Good morning, my dear," replies the Baba Yaga.

  "Mother has sent me to ask you for a needle and thread to
  make me a shift."

  "Very well; sit down and weave a little in the meantime."

  So the girl sat down behind the loom, and the Baba Yaga
  went outside, and said to her servant-maid:

  "Go and heat the bath, and get my niece washed; and mind
  you look sharp after her. I want to breakfast off her."

  Well, the girl sat there in such a fright that she was as much
  dead as alive. Presently she spoke imploringly to the servant-maid,
  saying:

  "Kinswoman dear, do please wet the firewood instead of
  making it burn; and fetch the water for the bath in a sieve."
  And she made her a present of a handkerchief.

  The Baba Yaga waited awhile; then she came to the window
  and asked:

  "Are you weaving, niece? are you weaving, my dear?"

  "Oh yes, dear aunt, I'm weaving." So the Baba Yaga went
  away again, and the girl gave the Cat a piece of bacon, and
  asked:

  "Is there no way of escaping from here?"

  "Here's a comb for you and a towel," said the Cat; "take
  them, and be off. The Baba Yaga will pursue you, but you must
  lay your ear on the ground, and when you hear that she is close
  at hand, first of all throw down the towel. It will become a wide,
  wide river. And if the Baba Yaga gets across the river, and
  tries to catch you, then you must lay your ear on the ground
  again, and when you hear that she is close at hand, throw down
  the comb. It will become a dense, dense forest; through that
  she won't be able to force her way anyhow."

  The girl took the towel and the comb and fled. The dogs
  would have rent her, but she threw them the rolls, and they let
  her go by; the doors would have begun to bang, but she poured
  oil on their hinges, and they let her pass through; the birch-tree
  would have poked her eyes out, but she tied the ribbon around
  it, and it let her pass on. And the Cat sat down to the loom,
  and worked away; muddled everything about, if it didn't do
  much weaving. Up came the Baba Yaga to the window, and
  asked:

  "Are you weaving, niece? are you weaving, my dear?"

  "I'm weaving, dear aunt, I'm weaving," gruffly replied the
  Cat.

  The Baba Yaga rushed into the hut, saw that the girl was
  gone, and took to beating the Cat, and abusing it for not having
  scratched the girl's eyes out. "Long as I've served you," said
  the Cat, "you've never given me so much as a bone; but she
  gave me bacon." Then the Baba Yaga pounced upon the dogs,
  on the doors, on the birch-tree, and on the servant-maid, and set
  to work to abuse them all, and to knock them about. Then the
  dogs said to her, "Long as we've served you, you've never so
  much as pitched us a burnt crust; but she gave us rolls to eat."
  And the doors said, "Long as we've served you, you've never
  poured even a drop of water on our hinges; but she poured oil
  on us." The birch-tree said, "Long as I've served you, you've
  never tied a single thread round me; but she fastened a ribbon
  around me." And the servant-maid said, "Long as I've served
  you, you've never given me so much as a rag; but she gave me
  a handkerchief."

  The Baba Yaga, bony of limb, quickly jumped into her
  mortar, sent it flying along with the pestle, sweeping away the
  while all traces of its flight with a broom, and set off in pursuit
  of the girl. Then the girl put her ear to the ground, and when
  she heard that the Baba Yaga was chasing her, and was now
  close at hand, she flung down the towel. And it became a wide,
  such a wide river! Up came the Baba Yaga to the river, and
  gnashed her teeth with spite; then she went home for her oxen,
  and drove them to the river. The oxen drank up every drop of
  the river, and then the Baba Yaga began the pursuit anew.
  But the girl put her ear to the ground again, and when she heard
  that the Baba Yaga was near, she flung down the comb, and
  instantly a forest sprang up, such an awfully thick one! The
  Baba Yaga began gnawing away at it, but however hard she
  worked, she couldn't gnaw her way through it, so she had to go
  back again.

  But by this time the girl's father had returned home, and he
  asked:

  "Where's my daughter?"

  "She's gone to her aunt's," replied her stepmother.

  Soon afterwards the girl herself came running home.

  "Where have you been?" asked her father.

  "Ah, father!" she said, "mother sent me to aunt's to ask
  for a needle and thread to make me a shift. But aunt's a Baba
  Yaga, and she wanted to eat me!"

  "And how did you get away, daughter?"

  "Why like this," said the girl, and explained the whole
  matter. As soon as her father had heard all about it, he became
  wroth with his wife, and shot her. But he and his daughter
  lived on and flourished, and everything went well with them.

In one of the numerous variants of this story[162] the heroine is sent
by her husband's mother to the Baba Yaga's, and the advice which saves
her comes from her husband. The Baba Yaga goes into another room "in
order to sharpen her teeth," and while she is engaged in that
operation the girl escapes, having previously--by the advice of the
Cat, to which she had given a lump of butter--spat under the
threshold. The spittle answers for her in her absence, behaving as do,
in other folk-tales, drops of blood, or rags dipped in blood, or
apples, or eggs, or beans, or stone images, or wooden puppets.[163]

The magic comb and towel, by the aid of which the girl effects her
escape, constantly figure in Skazkas of this class, and always produce
the required effect. A brush, also, is frequently introduced, from
each bristle of which springs up a wood. In one story, however, the
brush gives rise to mountains, and a _golik_, or bath-room whisk,
turns into a forest. The towel is used, also, for the purpose of
constructing or annihilating a bridge. Similar instruments are found
in the folk-tales of every land, whether they appear as the brush,
comb, and mirror of the German water-sprite;[164] or the rod, stone,
and pitcher of water of the Norse Troll;[165] or the knife, comb, and
handful of salt which, in the Modern Greek story, save Asterinos and
Pulja from their fiendish mother;[166] or the twig, the stone, and the
bladder of water, found in the ear of the filly, which saves her
master from the Gaelic giant;[167] or the brush, comb, and egg, the
last of which produces a frozen lake with "mirror-smooth" surface,
whereon the pursuing Old Prussian witch slips and breaks her
neck;[168] or the wand which causes a river to flow and a mountain to
rise between the youth who waves it and the "wicked old Rákshasa" who
chases him in the Deccan story;[169] or the handful of earth, cup of
water, and dry sticks and match, which impede and finally destroy the
Rákshasa in the almost identical episode of Somadeva's tale of "The
Prince of Varddhamána."[170]

In each instance they appear to typify the influence which the
supernatural beings to whom they belonged were supposed to exercise
over the elements. It has been thought strange that such stress should
be laid on the employment of certain toilet-articles, to the use of
which the heroes of folk-tales do not appear to have been greatly
addicted. But it is evident that like produces like in the
transformation in question. In the oldest form of the story, the
Sanskrit, a handful of earth turns into a mountain, a cup of water
into a river. Now, metaphorically speaking, a brush may be taken as a
miniature wood; the common use of the term brushwood is a proof of the
general acceptance of the metaphor. A comb does not at first sight
appear to resemble a mountain, but its indented outline may have
struck the fancy of many primitive peoples as being a likeness to a
serrated mountain range. Thence comes it that in German _Kamm_ means
not only a comb but also (like the Spanish _Sierra_) a mountain ridge
or crest.[171]

In one of the numerous stories[172] about the Baba Yaga, four heroes
are wandering about the world together; when they come to a dense
forest in which a small izba, or hut, is twirling round on "a fowl's
leg." Ivan, the youngest of the party, utters the magical formula
"Izbushka, Izbushka! stand with back to the forest and front towards
us," and "the hut faces towards them, its doors and windows open of
their own accord." The heroes enter and find it empty. One of the
party then remains indoors, while the rest go out to the chase. The
hero who is left alone prepares a meal, and then, "after washing his
head, sits down by the window to comb his hair." Suddenly a stone is
lifted, and from under it appears a Baba Yaga, driving in her mortar,
with a dog yelping at her heels. She enters the hut and, after some
short parley, seizes her pestle, and begins beating the hero with it
until he falls prostrate. Then she cuts a strip out of his back, eats
up the whole of the viands he has prepared for his companions, and
disappears. After a time the beaten hero recovers his senses, "ties up
his head with a handkerchief," and sits groaning until his comrades
return. Then he makes some excuse for not having got any supper ready
for them, but says nothing about what has really happened to him.

On the next day the second hero is treated in the same manner by the
Baba Yaga, and on the day after that the third undergoes a similar
humiliation. But on the fourth day it falls to the lot of the young
Ivan to stay in the hut alone. The Baba Yaga appears as usual, and
begins thumping him with her pestle; but he snatches it from her,
beats her almost to death with it, cuts three strips out of her back,
and then locks her up in a closet. When his comrades return, they are
surprised to find him unhurt, and a meal prepared for them, but they
ask no questions. After supper they all take a bath, and then Ivan
remarks that each of his companions has had a strip cut out of his
back. This leads to a full confession, on hearing which Ivan "runs to
the closet, takes those strips out of the Baba Yaga, and applies them
to their backs," which immediately become cured. He then hangs up the
Baba Yaga by a cord tied to one foot, at which cord all the party
shoot. At length it is severed, and she drops. As soon as she touches
the ground, she runs to the stone from under which she had appeared,
lifts it, and disappears.[173]

The rest of the story is very similar to that of "Norka," which has
already been given, only instead of the beast of that name we have the
Baba Yaga, whom Ivan finds asleep, with a magic sword at her head.
Following the advice of her daughters, three fair maidens whom he
meets in her palace, Ivan does not attempt to touch the magic sword
while she sleeps. But he awakes her gently, and offers her two golden
apples on a silver dish. She lifts her head and opens her mouth,
whereupon he seizes the sword and cuts her head off. As is usual in
the stories of this class, his comrades, after hoisting the maidens
aloft, cut the cord and let him fall back into the abyss. But he
escapes, and eventually "he slays all the three heroes, and flings
their bodies on the plain for wild beasts to devour." This Skazka is
one of the many versions of a widespread tale, which tells how the
youngest of a party, usually consisting of three persons, overcomes
some supernatural foe, generally a dwarf, who had been more than a
match for his companions. The most important of these versions is the
Lithuanian story of the carpenter who overcomes a Laume--a being in
many respects akin to the Baba Yaga--who has proved too strong for his
comrades, Perkun and the Devil.[174]

The practice of cutting strips from an enemy's back is frequently
referred to in the Skazkas--much more frequently than in the German
and Norse stories. It is not often that such strips are turned to good
account, but in the Skazka with which we have just been dealing, Ivan
finding the rope by which he is being lowered into the abyss too
short, ties to the end of it the three strips he has cut from the Baba
Yaga's back, and so makes it sufficiently long. They are often exacted
as the penalty of losing a wager, as well in the Skazkas as
elsewhere.[175] In a West-Slavonian story about a wager of this kind,
the winner cuts off the loser's nose.[176] In the Gaelic stories it is
not an uncommon incident for a man to have "a strip of skin cut off
him from his crown to his sole."[177]

The Baba Yaga generally kills people in order to eat them. Her house
is fenced about with the bones of the men whose flesh she has
devoured; in one story she offers a human arm, by way of a meal, to a
girl who visits her. But she is also represented in one of the
stories[178] as petrifying her victims. This trait connects her with
Medusa, and the three sister Baba Yagas with the three Gorgones. The
Russian Gorgo's method of petrifaction is singular. In the story
referred to, Ivan Dévich (Ivan the servant-maid's son) meets a Baba
Yaga, who plucks one of her hairs, gives it to him, and says, "Tie
three knots and then blow." He does so, and both he and his horse turn
into stone. The Baba Yaga places them in her mortar, pounds them to
bits, and buries their remains under a stone. A little later comes
Ivan Dévich's comrade, Prince Ivan. Him also the Yaga attempts to
destroy, but he feigns ignorance, and persuades her to show him how to
tie knots and to blow. The result is that she becomes petrified
herself. Prince Ivan puts her in her own mortar, and proceeds to pound
her therein, until she tells him where the fragments of his comrade
are, and what he must do to restore them to life.

The Baba Yaga usually lives by herself, but sometimes she appears in
the character of the house-mother. One of the Skazkas[179] relates how
a certain old couple, who had no children, were advised to get a
number of eggs from the village--one from each house--and to place
them under a sitting hen. From the forty-one eggs thus obtained and
treated are born as many boys, all but one of whom develop into strong
men, but the forty-first long remains a poor weak creature, a kind of
"Hop-o'-my-thumb." They all set forth to seek brides, and eventually
marry the forty-one daughters of a Baba Yaga. On the wedding night she
intends to kill her sons-in-law; but they, acting on the advice of him
who had been the weakling of their party, but who has become a mighty
hero, exchange clothes with their brides before "lying down to sleep."
Accordingly the Baba Yaga's "trusty servants" cut off the heads of her
daughters instead of those of her sons-in-law. Those youths arise,
stick the heads of their brides on iron spikes all round the house,
and gallop away. When the Baba Yaga awakes in the morning, looks out
of the window, and sees her daughters' heads on their spikes, she
flies into a passion, calls for "her burning shield," sets off in
pursuit of her sons-in-law, and "begins burning up everything on all
four sides with her shield." A magic, bridge-creating kerchief,
however, enables the fugitives to escape from their irritated
mother-in-law.

In one story[180] the heroine is ordered to swing the cradle in which
reposes a Baba Yaga's infant son, whom she is ordered to address in
terms of respect when she sings him lullabies; in others she is told
to wash a Baba Yaga's many children, whose appearance is usually
unprepossessing. One girl, for instance, is ordered by a Baba Yaga to
heat the bath, but the fuel given her for the purpose turns out to be
dead men's bones. Having got over this difficulty, thanks to the
advice of a sparrow which tells her where to look for wood, she is
sent to fetch water in a sieve. Again the sparrow comes to her rescue
telling her to line the sieve with clay. Then she is told to wait upon
the Baba Yaga's children in the bath-room. She enters it, and
presently in come "worms, frogs, rats, and all sorts of insects."
These, which are the Baba Yaga's children, she soaps over and
otherwise treats in the approved Russian-bath style, and afterwards
she does as much for their mother. The Baba Yaga is highly pleased,
calls for a "samovar" (or urn), and invites her young bath-woman to
drink tea with her. And finally she sends her home with a blue coffer,
which turns out to be full of money. This present excites the cupidity
of her stepmother, who sends her own daughter to the Baba Yaga's,
hoping that she will bring back a similar treasure. The Baba Yaga
gives the same orders as before to the new-comer, but that conceited
young person fails to carry them out. She cannot make the bones burn,
nor the sieve hold water, but when the sparrow offers its advice she
only boxes its ears. And when the "rats, frogs, and all manner of
vermin," enter the bath-room, "she crushed half of them to death,"
says the story; "the rest ran home, and complained about her to their
mother." And so the Baba Yaga, when she dismisses her, gives her a red
coffer instead of a blue one. Out of it, when it is opened, issues
fire, which consumes both her and her mother.[181]

Similar to this story in many of its features as well as in its
catastrophe is one of the most spirited and dramatic of all the
Skazkas, that of--


  VASILISSA THE FAIR.[182]

  In a certain kingdom there lived a merchant. Twelve years
  did he live as a married man, but he had only one child, Vasilissa
  the Fair. When her mother died, the girl was eight years
  old. And on her deathbed the merchant's wife called her little
  daughter to her, took out from under the bed-clothes a doll,
  gave it to her, and said, "Listen, Vasilissa, dear; remember
  and obey these last words of mine. I am going to die. And
  now, together with my parental blessing, I bequeath to you this
  doll. Keep it always by you, and never show it to anybody; and
  whenever any misfortune comes upon you, give the doll food,
  and ask its advice. When it has fed, it will tell you a cure for
  your troubles." Then the mother kissed her child and died.

  After his wife's death, the merchant mourned for her a befitting
  time, and then began to consider about marrying again. He
  was a man of means. It wasn't a question with him of girls (with
  dowries); more than all others, a certain widow took his fancy.
  She was middle-aged, and had a couple of daughters of her own
  just about the same age as Vasilissa. She must needs be both
  a good housekeeper and an experienced mother.

  Well, the merchant married the widow, but he had deceived
  himself, for he did not find in her a kind mother for his
  Vasilissa. Vasilissa was the prettiest girl[183] in all the
  village; but her stepmother and stepsisters were jealous of her
  beauty, and tormented her with every possible sort of toil, in
  order that she might grow thin from over-work, and be tanned by
  the sun and the wind. Her life was made a burden to her! Vasilissa
  bore everything with resignation, and every day grew plumper and
  prettier, while the stepmother and her daughters lost flesh and
  fell off in appearance from the effects of their own spite,
  notwithstanding that they always sat with folded hands like fine
  ladies.

  But how did that come about? Why, it was her doll that
  helped Vasilissa. If it hadn't been for it, however could the
  girl have got through all her work? And therefore it was that
  Vasilissa would never eat all her share of a meal, but always
  kept the most delicate morsel for her doll; and at night, when
  all were at rest, she would shut herself up in the narrow chamber[184]
  in which she slept, and feast her doll, saying[185] the while:

  "There, dolly, feed; help me in my need! I live in my
  father's house, but never know what pleasure is; my evil stepmother
  tries to drive me out of the white world; teach me how
  to keep alive, and what I ought to do."

  Then the doll would eat, and afterwards give her advice, and
  comfort her in her sorrow, and next day it would do all Vasilissa's
  work for her. She had only to take her ease in a shady place
  and pluck flowers, and yet all her work was done in good time;
  the beds were weeded, and the pails were filled, and the cabbages
  were watered, and the stove was heated. Moreover, the
  doll showed Vasilissa herbs which prevented her from getting
  sunburnt. Happily did she and her doll live together.

  Several years went by. Vasilissa grew up and became old
  enough to be married.[186] All the marriageable young men in the
  town sent to make an offer to Vasilissa; at her stepmother's
  daughters not a soul would so much as look. Her stepmother
  grew even more savage than before, and replied to every
  suitor--

  "We won't let the younger marry before her elders."

  And after the suitors had been packed off, she used to beat
  Vasilissa by way of wreaking her spite.

  Well, it happened one day that the merchant had to go
  away from home on business for a long time. Thereupon the
  stepmother went to live in another house; and near that house
  was a dense forest, and in a clearing in that forest there stood
  a hut,[187] and in the hut there lived a Baba Yaga. She never let
  any one come near her dwelling, and she ate up people like so
  many chickens.

  Having moved into the new abode, the merchant's wife kept
  sending her hated Vasilissa into the forest on one pretence or
  another. But the girl always got home safe and sound; the
  doll used to show her the way, and never let her go near the
  Baba Yaga's dwelling.

  The autumn season arrived. One evening the stepmother
  gave out their work to the three girls; one she set to lace-making,
  another to knitting socks, and the third, Vasilissa, to weaving;
  and each of them had her allotted amount to do. By-and-by
  she put out the lights in the house, leaving only one candle
  alight where the girls were working, and then she went to bed.
  The girls worked and worked. Presently the candle wanted
  snuffing; one of the stepdaughters took the snuffers, as if she
  were going to clear the wick, but instead of doing so, in obedience
  to her mother's orders, she snuffed the candle out, pretending
  to do so by accident.

  "What shall we do now?" said the girls. "There isn't a
  spark of fire in the house, and our tasks are not yet done. We
  must go to the Baba Yaga's for a light!"

  "My pins give me light enough," said the one who was making
  lace. "I shan't go."

  "And I shan't go, either," said the one who was knitting
  socks. "My knitting-needles give me light enough."

  "Vasilissa, you must go for the light," they both cried out
  together; "be off to the Baba Yaga's!"

  And they pushed Vasilissa out of the room.

  Vasilissa went into her little closet, set before the doll a supper
  which she had provided beforehand, and said:

  "Now, dolly, feed, and listen to my need! I'm sent to the
  Baba Yaga's for a light. The Baba Yaga will eat me!"

  The doll fed, and its eyes began to glow just like a couple of
  candles.

  "Never fear, Vasilissa dear!" it said. "Go where you're
  sent. Only take care to keep me always by you. As long as I'm
  with you, no harm will come to you at the Baba Yaga's."

  So Vasilissa got ready, put her doll in her pocket, crossed
  herself, and went out into the thick forest.

  As she walks she trembles. Suddenly a horseman gallops
  by. He is white, and he is dressed in white, under him is a white
  horse, and the trappings of the horse are white--and the day
  begins to break.

  She goes a little further, and a second rider gallops by. He
  is red, dressed in red, and sitting on a red horse--and the sun
  rises.

  Vasilissa went on walking all night and all next day. It was
  only towards the evening that she reached the clearing on which
  stood the dwelling of the Baba Yaga. The fence around it was
  made of dead men's bones; on the top of the fence were stuck
  human skulls with eyes in them; instead of uprights at the gates
  were men's legs; instead of bolts were arms; instead of a lock
  was a mouth with sharp teeth.

  Vasilissa was frightened out of her wits, and stood still as if
  rooted to the ground.

  Suddenly there rode past another horseman. He was black,
  dressed all in black, and on a black horse. He galloped up to
  the Baba Yaga's gate and disappeared, just as if he had sunk
  through the ground--and night fell. But the darkness did not
  last long. The eyes of all the skulls on the fence began to shine
  and the whole clearing became as bright as if it had been midday.
  Vasilissa shuddered with fear, but stopped where she was,
  not knowing which way to run.

  Soon there was heard in the forest a terrible roar. The trees
  cracked, the dry leaves rustled; out of the forest came the Baba
  Yaga, riding in a mortar, urging it on with a pestle, sweeping
  away her traces with a broom. Up she drove to the gate, stopped
  short, and, snuffing the air around her, cried:--

  "Faugh! Faugh! I smell Russian flesh![188] Who's there?"

  Vasilissa went up to the hag in a terrible fright, bowed low
  before her, and said:--

  "It's me, granny. My stepsisters have sent me to you for a
  light."

  "Very good," said the Baba Yaga; "I know them. If you'll
  stop awhile with me first, and do some work for me, I'll give you
  a light. But if you won't, I'll eat you!"

  Then she turned to the gates, and cried:--

  "Ho, thou firm fence of mine, be thou divided! And ye, wide
  gates of mine, do ye fly open!"

  The gates opened, and the Baba Yaga drove in, whistling as
  she went, and after her followed Vasilissa; and then everything
  shut to again. When they entered the sitting-room, the Baba
  Yaga stretched herself out at full length, and said to Vasilissa:

  "Fetch out what there is in the oven; I'm hungry."

  Vasilissa lighted a splinter[189] at one of the skulls which were
  on the fence, and began fetching meat from the oven and setting
  it before the Baba Yaga; and meat enough had been provided
  for a dozen people. Then she fetched from the cellar kvass,
  mead, beer, and wine. The hag ate up everything, drank up
  everything. All she left for Vasilissa was a few scraps--a crust
  of bread and a morsel of sucking-pig. Then the Baba Yaga lay
  down to sleep, saying:--

  "When I go out to-morrow morning, mind you cleanse the
  courtyard, sweep the room, cook the dinner, and get the linen
  ready. Then go to the corn-bin, take out four quarters of wheat,
  and clear it of other seed.[190] And mind you have it all done--if
  you don't, I shall eat you!"

  After giving these orders the Baba Yaga began to snore. But
  Vasilissa set the remnants of the hag's supper before her doll,
  burst into tears, and said:--

  "Now, dolly, feed, listen to my need! The Baba Yaga has
  set me a heavy task, and threatens to eat me if I don't do it all.
  Do help me!"

  The doll replied:

  "Never fear, Vasilissa the Fair! Sup, say your prayers, and
  go to bed. The morning is wiser than the evening!"

  Vasilissa awoke very early, but the Baba Yaga was already up.
  She looked out of the window. The light in the skull's eyes was
  going out. All of a sudden there appeared the white horseman,
  and all was light. The Baba Yaga went out into the courtyard and
  whistled--before her appeared a mortar with a pestle and a broom.
  The red horseman appeared--the sun rose. The Baba Yaga
  seated herself in the mortar, and drove out of the courtyard,
  shooting herself along with the pestle, sweeping away her traces
  with the broom.

  Vasilissa was left alone, so she examined the Baba Yaga's
  house, wondered at the abundance there was in everything, and
  remained lost in thought as to which work she ought to take to
  first. She looked up; all her work was done already. The doll
  had cleared the wheat to the very last grain.

  "Ah, my preserver!" cried Vasilissa, "you've saved me
  from danger!"

  "All you've got to do now is to cook the dinner," answered
  the doll, slipping into Vasilissa's pocket. "Cook away, in God's
  name, and then take some rest for your health's sake!"

  Towards evening Vasilissa got the table ready, and awaited
  the Baba Yaga. It began to grow dusky; the black rider appeared
  for a moment at the gate, and all grew dark. Only the
  eyes of the skulls sent forth their light. The trees began to
  crack, the leaves began to rustle, up drove the Baba Yaga.
  Vasilissa went out to meet her.

  "Is everything done?" asks the Yaga.

  "Please to look for yourself, granny!" says Vasilissa.

  The Baba Yaga examined everything, was vexed that there
  was nothing to be angry about, and said:

  "Well, well! very good!"

  Afterwards she cried:

  "My trusty servants, zealous friends, grind this my wheat!"

  There appeared three pairs of hands, which gathered up the
  wheat, and carried it out of sight. The Baba Yaga supped, went
  to bed, and again gave her orders to Vasilissa:

  "Do just the same to-morrow as to-day; only besides that take
  out of the bin the poppy seed that is there, and clean the earth
  off it grain by grain. Some one or other, you see, has mixed a
  lot of earth with it out of spite." Having said this, the hag turned
  to the wall and began to snore, and Vasilissa took to feeding her
  doll. The doll fed, and then said to her what it had said the
  day before:

  "Pray to God, and go to sleep. The morning is wiser than the
  evening. All shall be done, Vasilissa dear!"

  The next morning the Baba Yaga again drove out of the courtyard
  in her mortar, and Vasilissa and her doll immediately did
  all the work. The hag returned, looked at everything, and cried,
  "My trusty servants, zealous friends, press forth oil from the
  poppy seed!"

  Three pairs of hands appeared, gathered up the poppy seed,
  and bore it out of sight. The Baba Yaga sat down to dinner.
  She ate, but Vasilissa stood silently by.

  "Why don't you speak to me?" said the Baba Yaga; "there
  you stand like a dumb creature!"

  "I didn't dare," answered Vasilissa; "but if you give me
  leave, I should like to ask you about something."

  "Ask away; only it isn't every question that brings good.
  'Get much to know, and old soon you'll grow.'"

  "I only want to ask you, granny, about something I saw. As
  I was coming here, I was passed by one riding on a white horse;
  he was white himself, and dressed in white. Who was he?"

  "That was my bright Day!" answered the Baba Yaga.

  "Afterwards there passed me another rider, on a red horse;
  red himself, and all in red clothes. Who was he?"

  "That was my red Sun!"[191] answered the Baba Yaga.

  "And who may be the black rider, granny, who passed by
  me just at your gate?"

  "That was my dark Night; they are all trusty servants of
  mine."

  Vasilissa thought of the three pairs of hands, but held her
  peace.

  "Why don't you go on asking?" said the Baba Yaga.

  "That's enough for me, granny. You said yourself, 'Get
  too much to know, old you'll grow!'"

  "It's just as well," said the Baba Yaga, "that you've only
  asked about what you saw out of doors, not indoors! In my house
  I hate having dirt carried out of doors;[192] and as to over-inquisitive
  people--well, I eat them. Now I'll ask you something.
  How is it you manage to do the work I set you to do?"

  "My mother's blessing assists me," replied Vasilissa.

  "Eh! eh! what's that? Get along out of my house, you
  bless'd daughter. I don't want bless'd people."

  She dragged Vasilissa out of the room, pushed her outside
  the gates, took one of the skulls with blazing eyes from the
  fence, stuck it on a stick, gave it to her and said:

  "Lay hold of that. It's a light you can take to your stepsisters.
  That's what they sent you here for, I believe."

  Home went Vasilissa at a run, lit by the skull, which went out
  only at the approach of the dawn; and at last, on the evening
  of the second day, she reached home. When she came to the
  gate, she was going to throw away the skull.

  "Surely," thinks she, "they can't be still in want of a light
  at home." But suddenly a hollow voice issued from the skull,
  saying:

  "Throw me not away. Carry me to your stepmother!"

  She looked at her stepmother's house, and not seeing a light
  in a single window, she determined to take the skull in there
  with her. For the first time in her life she was cordially received
  by her stepmother and stepsisters, who told her that from the
  moment she went away they hadn't had a spark of fire in the
  house. They couldn't strike a light themselves anyhow, and
  whenever they brought one in from a neighbor's, it went out as
  soon as it came into the room.

  "Perhaps your light will keep in!" said the stepmother. So
  they carried the skull into the sitting-room. But the eyes of the
  skull so glared at the stepmother and her daughters--shot forth
  such flames! They would fain have hidden themselves, but run
  where they would, everywhere did the eyes follow after them.
  By the morning they were utterly burnt to cinders. Only Vasilissa
  was none the worse.[193]

      [Next morning Vasilissa "buried the skull," locked up
      the house and took up her quarters in a neighboring
      town. After a time she began to work. Her doll made
      her a glorious loom, and by the end of the winter she
      had weaved a quantity of linen so fine that it might
      be passed like thread through the eye of a needle. In
      the spring, after it had been bleached, Vasilissa made
      a present of it to the old woman with whom she lodged.
      The crone presented it to the king, who ordered it to
      be made into shirts. But no seamstress could be found
      to make them up, until the linen was entrusted to
      Vasilissa. When a dozen shirts were ready, Vasilissa
      sent them to the king, and as soon as her carrier had
      started, "she washed herself, and combed her hair, and
      dressed herself, and sat down at the window." Before
      long there arrived a messenger demanding her instant
      appearance at court. And "when she appeared before the
      royal eyes," the king fell desperately in love with
      her.

      "No; my beauty!" said he, "never will I part with
      thee; thou shalt be my wife." So he married her; and
      by-and-by her father returned, and took up his abode
      with her. "And Vasilissa took the old woman into her
      service, and as for the doll--to the end of her life
      she always carried it in her pocket."]

The puppet which plays so important a part in this story is worthy of
a special examination. It is called in the original a _Kùkla_ (dim.
_Kùkolka_), a word designating any sort of puppet or other figure
representing either man or beast. In a Little-Russian variant[194] of
one of those numerous stories, current in all lands, which commence
with the escape of the heroine from an incestuous union, a priest
insists on marrying his daughter. She goes to her mother's grave and
weeps there. Her dead mother "comes out from her grave," and tells her
what to do. The girl obtains from her father a rough dress of pig's
skin, and two sets of gorgeous apparel; the former she herself
assumes, in the latter she dresses up three _Kuklui_, which in this
instance were probably mere blocks of wood. Then she takes her place
in the midst of the dressed-up forms, which cry, one after the other,
"Open, O moist earth, that the fair maiden may enter within thee!" The
earth opens, and all four sink into it.

This introduction is almost identical with that prefixed to the German
story of "Allerleirauh,"[195] except in so far as the puppets are
concerned.

Sometimes it is a brother, instead of a father, from whom the heroine
is forced to flee. Thus in the story of _Kniaz Danila Govorila_,[196]
Prince Daniel the Talker is bent upon marrying his sister, pleading
the excuse so often given in stories on this theme, namely, that she
is the only maiden whose finger will fit the magic ring which is to
indicate to him his destined wife. While she is weeping "like a
river," some old women of the mendicant-pilgrim class come to her
rescue, telling her to make four _Kukolki_, or small puppets, and to
place one of them in each corner of her room. She does as they tell
her. The wedding day arrives, the marriage service is performed in the
church, and then the bride hastens back to the room. When she is
called for--says the story--the puppets in the four corners begin to
coo.[197]

"Kuku! Prince Danila!

"Kuku! Govorila.

"Kuku! He wants to marry,

"Kuku! His own sister.

"Kuku! Split open, O Earth!

"Kuku! Sister, disappear!"

The earth opens, and the girl slowly sinks into it. Twice again the
puppets sing their song, and at the end of its third performance, the
earth closes over the head of the rescued bride. Presently in rushes
the irritated bridegroom. "No bride is to be seen; only in the corners
sit the puppets singing away to themselves." He flies into a passion,
seizes a hatchet, chops off their heads, and flings them into the
fire.[198]

In another version of the same story[199] a son is ordered by his
parents to marry his sister after their death. They die, and he tells
her to get ready to be married. But she has prepared three puppets,
and when she goes into her room to dress for the wedding, she says to
them:

"O Kukolki, (cry) Kuku!"

The first asks, "Why?"

The second replies, "Because the brother his sister takes."

The third says, "Split open, O Earth! disappear, O sister!"

All this is said three times, and then the earth opens, and the girl
sinks "into that world."

In two other Russian versions of the same story, the sister escapes by
natural means. In the first[200] she runs away and hides in the hollow
of an oak. In the second[201] she persuades a fisherman to convey her
across a sea or lake. In a Polish version[202] the sister obtains a
magic car, which sinks underground with her, while the spot on which
she has spat replies to every summons which is addressed to her.[203]

Before taking leave of the Baba Yaga, we may glance at a malevolent
monster, who seems to be her male counterpart. He appears, however, to
be known in South Russia only. Here is an outline of the contents of
the solitary story in which he is mentioned. There were two old folks
with whom lived two orphan grandchildren, charming little girls. One
day the youngest child was sent to drive the sparrows away from her
grandfather's pease. While she was thus engaged the forest began to
roar, and out from it came Verlioka, "of vast stature, one-eyed,
crook-nosed, bristly-headed, with tangled beard and moustaches half an
ell long, and with a wooden boot on his one foot, supporting himself
on a crutch, and giving vent to a terrible laughter." And Verlioka
caught sight of the little girl and immediately killed her with his
crutch. And afterwards he killed her sister also, and then the old
grandmother. The grandfather, however, managed to escape with his
life, and afterwards, with the help of a drake and other aiders, he
wreaked his vengeance on the murderous Verlioka.[204]

We will now turn to another female embodiment of evil, frequently
mentioned in the Skazkas--the Witch.[205] She so closely resembles the
Baba Yaga both in disposition and in behavior, that most of the
remarks which have been made about that wild being apply to her also.
In many cases, indeed, we find that one version of a story will allot
to a Baba Yaga the part which in another version is played by a Witch.
The name which she bears--that of _Vyed'ma_--is a misnomer; it
properly belongs either to the "wise woman," or prophetess, of old
times, or to her modern representative, the woman to whom Russian
superstition attributes the faculties and functions ascribed in olden
days by most of our jurisprudents, in more recent times by a few of
our rustics, to our own witch. The supernatural being who, in
folk-tales, sways the elements and preys upon mankind, is most
inadequately designated by such names as _Vyed'ma_, _Hexe_, or
_Witch_, suggestive as those now homely terms are of merely human,
though diabolically intensified malevolence. Far more in keeping with
the vastness of her powers, and the vagueness of her outline, are the
titles of Baba Yaga, Lamia, Striga, Troll-Wife, Ogress, or Dragoness,
under which she figures in various lands. And therefore it is in her
capacity of Baba Yaga, rather than in that of _Vyed'ma_, that we
desire to study the behavior of the Russian equivalent for the
terrible female form which figures in the Anglo-Saxon poem as the
Mother of Grendel.

From among the numerous stories relating to the _Vyed'ma_ we may
select the following, which bears her name.


  THE WITCH.[206]

  There once lived an old couple who had one son called
  Ivashko;[207] no one can tell how fond they were of him!

  Well, one day, Ivashko said to his father and mother:

  "I'll go out fishing if you'll let me."

  "What are you thinking about! you're still very small; suppose
  you get drowned, what good will there be in that?"

  "No, no, I shan't get drowned. I'll catch you some fish;
  do let me go!"

  So his mother put a white shirt on him, tied a red girdle round
  him, and let him go. Out in a boat he sat and said:

    Canoe, canoe, float a little farther,
    Canoe, canoe, float a little farther!

  Then the canoe floated on farther and farther, and Ivashko began to
  fish. When some little time had passed by, the old woman hobbled down
  to the river side and called to her son:

    Ivashechko, Ivashechko, my boy,
    Float up, float up, unto the waterside;
    I bring thee food and drink.

  And Ivashko said:

    Canoe, canoe, float to the waterside;
    That is my mother calling me.

  The boat floated to the shore: the woman took the fish, gave her boy
  food and drink, changed his shirt for him and his girdle, and sent him
  back to his fishing. Again he sat in his boat and said:

    Canoe, canoe, float a little farther,
    Canoe, canoe, float a little farther.

  Then the canoe floated on farther and farther, and Ivashko began to
  fish. After a little time had passed by, the old man also hobbled down
  to the bank and called to his son:

    Ivashechko, Ivashechko, my boy,
    Float up, float up, unto the waterside;
    I bring thee food and drink.

  And Ivashko replied:

    Canoe, canoe, float to the waterside;
    That is my father calling me.

  The canoe floated to the shore. The old man took the fish, gave his
  boy food and drink, changed his shirt for him and his girdle, and sent
  him back to his fishing.

  Now a certain witch[208] had heard what Ivashko's parents had cried
  aloud to him, and she longed to get hold of the boy. So she went down
  to the bank and cried with a hoarse voice:

    Ivashechko, Ivashechko, my boy,
    Float up, float up, unto the waterside;
    I bring thee food and drink.

  Ivashko perceived that the voice was not his mother's, but was that of
  a witch, and he sang:

    Canoe, canoe, float a little farther,
    Canoe, canoe, float a little farther;
    That is not my mother, but a witch who calls me.

  The witch saw that she must call Ivashko with just such a voice as
  his mother had.

  So she hastened to a smith and said to him:

  "Smith, smith! make me just such a thin little voice as Ivashko's
  mother has: if you don't, I'll eat you." So the smith forged her a
  little voice just like Ivashko's mother's. Then the witch went down by
  night to the shore and sang:

    Ivashechko, Ivashechko, my boy,
    Float up, float up, unto the waterside;
    I bring thee food and drink.

  Ivashko came, and she took the fish, and seized the boy and carried
  him home with her. When she arrived she said to her daughter
  Alenka,[209] "Heat the stove as hot as you can, and bake Ivashko well,
  while I go and collect my friends for the feast." So Alenka heated the
  stove hot, ever so hot, and said to Ivashko,

  "Come here and sit on this shovel!"

  "I'm still very young and foolish," answered Ivashko: "I haven't yet
  quite got my wits about me. Please teach me how one ought to sit on a
  shovel."

  "Very good," said Alenka; "it won't take long to teach you."

  But the moment she sat down on the shovel, Ivashko instantly pitched
  her into the oven, slammed to the iron plate in front of it, ran out
  of the hut, shut the door, and hurriedly climbed up ever so high an
  oak-tree [which stood close by].

  Presently the witch arrived with her guests and knocked at the door of
  the hut. But nobody opened it for her.

  "Ah! that cursed Alenka!" she cried. "No doubt she's gone off
  somewhere to amuse herself." Then she slipped in through the window,
  opened the door, and let in her guests. They all sat down to table,
  and the witch opened the oven, took out Alenka's baked body, and
  served it up. They all ate their fill and drank their fill, and then
  they went out into the courtyard and began rolling about on the grass.

  "I turn about, I roll about, having fed on Ivashko's flesh," cried
  the witch. "I turn about, I roll about, having fed on Ivashko's
  flesh."

  But Ivashko called out to her from the top of the oak:

  "Turn about, roll about, having fed on Alenka's flesh!"

  "Did I hear something?" said the witch. "No it was only the noise of
  the leaves." Again the witch began:

  "I turn about, I roll about, having fed on Ivashko's flesh!"

  And Ivashko repeated:

  "Turn about, roll about, having fed on Alenka's flesh!"

  Then the witch looked up and saw Ivashko, and immediately rushed at
  the oak on which Ivashko was seated, and began to gnaw away at it. And
  she gnawed, and gnawed, and gnawed, until at last she smashed two
  front teeth. Then she ran to a forge, and when she reached it she
  cried, "Smith, smith! make me some iron teeth; if you don't I'll eat
  you!"

  So the smith forged her two iron teeth.

  The witch returned and began gnawing the oak again.

  She gnawed, and gnawed, and was just on the point of gnawing it
  through, when Ivashko jumped out of it into another tree which stood
  beside it. The oak that the witch had gnawed through fell down to the
  ground; but then she saw that Ivashko was sitting up in another tree,
  so she gnashed her teeth with spite and set to work afresh, to gnaw
  that tree also. She gnawed, and gnawed, and gnawed--broke two lower
  teeth, and ran off to the forge.

  "Smith, smith!" she cried when she got there, "make me some iron
  teeth; if you don't I'll eat you!"

  The smith forged two more iron teeth for her. She went back again, and
  once more began to gnaw the oak.

  Ivashko didn't know what he was to do now. He looked out, and saw that
  swans and geese[210] were flying by, so he called to them imploringly:

    Oh, my swans and geese,
    Take me on your pinions,
    Bear me to my father and my mother,
    To the cottage of my father and my mother,
    There to eat, and drink, and live in comfort.

  "Let those in the centre carry you," said the birds.

  Ivashko waited; a second flock flew past, and he again cried
  imploringly:

    Oh, my swans and geese!
    Take me on your pinions,
    Bear me to my father and my mother,
    To the cottage of my father and my mother,
    There to eat, and drink, and live in comfort.

  "Let those in the rear carry you!" said the birds.

  Again Ivashko waited. A third flock came flying up, and he cried:

    Oh, my swans and geese!
    Take me on your pinions,
    Bear me to my father and my mother,
    To the cottage of my father and my mother,
    There to eat, and drink, and live in comfort.

  And those swans and geese took hold of him and carried him back, flew
  up to the cottage, and dropped him in the upper room.

  Early the next morning his mother set to work to bake pancakes, baked
  them, and all of a sudden fell to thinking about her boy. "Where is my
  Ivashko?" she cried; "would that I could see him, were it only in a
  dream!"

  Then his father said, "I dreamed that swans and geese had brought our
  Ivashko home on their wings."

  And when she had finished baking the pancakes, she said, "Now, then,
  old man, let's divide the cakes: there's for you, father! there's for
  me! There's for you, father! there's for me."

  "And none for me?" called out Ivashko.

  "There's for you, father!" went on the old woman, "there's for me."

  "And none for me!" [repeated the boy.]

  "Why, old man," said the wife, "go and see whatever that is up there."

  The father climbed into the upper room and there he found Ivashko.
  The old people were delighted, and asked their boy about everything
  that had happened. And after that he and they lived on happily
  together.

      [That part of this story which relates to the baking
      and eating of the witch's daughter is well known in
      many lands. It is found in the German "Hänsel und
      Grethel" (Grimm. _KM._ No. 15, and iii. p. 25, where a
      number of parallels are mentioned); in the Norse
      "Askelad" (Asbjörnsen and Moe, No. 1. Dasent, "Boots
      and the Troll," No. 32), where a Troll's daughter is
      baked; and "Smörbuk" (Asb. and Moe, No. 52. Dasent,
      "Buttercup," No. 18), in which the victim is daughter
      of a "Haugkjoerring," another name for a Troll-wife;
      in the Servian story of "The Stepmother," &c. (Vuk
      Karajich, No. 35, pp. 174-5) in which two _Chivuti_,
      or Jews, are tricked into eating their baked mother;
      in the Modern Greek stories (Hahn, No. 3 and ii. p.
      181), in which the hero bakes (1) a _Drakäna_, while
      her husband, the _Drakos_, is at church, (2) a
      _Lamiopula_, during the absence of the _Lamia_, her
      mother; and in the Albanian story of "Augenhündin"
      (Hahn, No. 95), in which the heroine gets rid in a
      similar manner of Maro, the daughter of that four eyed
      +sykieneza+. (See note, ii, 309.) Afanasief also refers
      (i. p. 121) to Haltrich, No. 37, and Haupt and
      Schmaler, ii. pp. 172-4. He also mentions a similar
      tale about a giantess existing among the Baltic
      Kashoubes. See also the end of the song of Tardanak,
      showing how he killed "the Seven Headed Jelbegen,"
      Radloff, i. p. 31.]

A variant of this story (from the Chernigof Government)[211] begins by
telling how two old people were childless for a long time. At last the
husband went into the forest, felled wood, and made a cradle. Into
this his wife laid one of the logs he had cut, and began swinging it,
crooning the while a rune beginning

    Swing, blockie dear, swing.

After a little time "behold! the block already had legs. The old
woman rejoiced greatly and began singing anew, and went on singing
until the block became a babe." In this variant the boy rows a silver
boat with a golden oar; in another South Russian variant[212] the boat
is golden, the oar of silver. In a White-Russian variant quoted by
Afanasief (i. p. 118), the place of the witch's daughter is filled by
her son, who had been in the habit of alluring to her den by gifts of
toys, and there devouring, the children from the adjacent villages.
Buslaef's "Historical Essays," (i. pp. 313-321) contain a valuable
investigation of Kulish's version of this story, which he compares
with the romance of "The Knight of the Swan."

In another of the variants of this story[213] Ivanushka is the son of
a Baruinya or Lady, and he is carried off in a whirlwind by a Baba
Yaga. His three sisters go to look for him, and each of them in turn
finds out where he is and attempts to carry him off, after sending the
Baba Yaga to sleep and smearing her eyelids with pitch. But the two
elder sisters are caught on their way home by the Baba Yaga, and
terribly scratched and torn. The youngest sister, however, succeeds in
rescuing her brother, having taken the precaution of propitiating with
butter the cat Jeremiah, "who was telling the boy stories and singing
him songs." When the Baba Yaga awakes, she tells Jeremiah to scratch
her eyes open, but he refuses, reminding her that, long as he has
lived under her roof, she has never in any way regaled him, whereas
the "fair maiden" had no sooner arrived than she treated him to
butter. In another variant[214] the bereaved mother sends three
servant-maids in search of her boy. Two of them get torn to pieces;
the third succeeds in saving Ivanushka from the Baba Yaga, who is so
vexed that she pinches her butter-bribed cat to death for not having
awakened her when the rescue took place. A comparison of these three
stories is sufficient to show how closely connected are the Witch and
the Baba Yaga, how readily the name of either of the two may be
transferred to the other.

But there is one class of stories in which the _Vyed'ma_ is
represented as differing from the Baba Yaga, in so far as she is the
offspring of parents who are not in any way supernatural or inhuman.
Without any apparent cause for her abnormal conduct, the daughter of
an ordinary royal house will suddenly begin to destroy and devour all
living things which fall in her way--her strength developing as
rapidly as her appetite. Of such a nature--to be accounted for only on
the supposition that an evil spirit has taken up its abode in a human
body[215]--is the witch who appears in the somewhat incomprehensible
story that follows.


  THE WITCH AND THE SUN'S SISTER.[216]

  In a certain far-off country there once lived a king and queen.
  And they had an only son, Prince Ivan, who was dumb from
  his birth. One day, when he was twelve years old, he went into
  the stable to see a groom who was a great friend of his.

  That groom always used to tell him tales [_skazki_], and on
  this occasion Prince Ivan went to him expecting to hear some
  stories [_skazochki_], but that wasn't what he heard.

  "Prince Ivan!" said the groom, "your mother will soon
  have a daughter, and you a sister. She will be a terrible witch,
  and she will eat up her father, and her mother, and all their subjects.
  So go and ask your father for the best horse he has--as
  if you wanted a gallop--and then, if you want to be out of harm's
  way, ride away whithersoever your eyes guide you."

  Prince Ivan ran off to his father and, for the first time in his
  life, began speaking to him.

  At that the king was so delighted that he never thought of
  asking what he wanted a good steed for, but immediately ordered
  the very best horse he had in his stud to be saddled for the
  prince.

  Prince Ivan mounted, and rode off without caring where he
  went.[217] Long, long did he ride.

  At length he came to where two old women were sewing
  and he begged them to let him live with them. But they said:

  "Gladly would we do so, Prince Ivan, only we have now
  but a short time to live. As soon as we have broken that trunkful
  of needles, and used up that trunkful of thread, that instant
  will death arrive!"

  Prince Ivan burst into tears and rode on. Long, long did
  he ride. At length he came to where the giant Vertodub was,[218]
  and he besought him, saying:

  "Take me to live with you."

  "Gladly would I have taken you, Prince Ivan!" replied the
  giant, "but now I have very little longer to live. As soon as I
  have pulled up all these trees by the roots, instantly will come
  my death!"

  More bitterly still did the prince weep as he rode farther and
  farther on. By-and-by he came to where the giant Vertogor
  was, and made the same request to him, but he replied:

  "Gladly would I have taken you, Prince Ivan! but I myself
  have very little longer to live. I am set here, you know, to
  level mountains. The moment I have settled matters with these
  you see remaining, then will my death come!"

  Prince Ivan burst into a flood of bitter tears, and rode on
  still farther. Long, long did he ride. At last he came to the
  dwelling of the Sun's Sister. She received him into her house,
  gave him food and drink, and treated him just as if he had been
  her own son.

  The prince now led an easy life. But it was all no use; he
  couldn't help being miserable. He longed so to know what was
  going on at home.

  He often went to the top of a high mountain, and thence
  gazed at the palace in which he used to live, and he could see
  that it was all eaten away; nothing but the bare walls remained!
  Then he would sigh and weep. Once when he returned after
  he had been thus looking and crying, the Sun's Sister asked
  him:

  "What makes your eyes so red to-day, Prince Ivan?"[219]

  "The wind has been blowing in them," said he.

  The same thing happened a second time. Then the Sun's
  Sister ordered the wind to stop blowing. Again a third time
  did Prince Ivan come back with a blubbered face. This time
  there was no help for it; he had to confess everything, and then
  he took to entreating the Sun's Sister to let him go, that he
  might satisfy himself about his old home. She would not let
  him go, but he went on urgently entreating.

  So at last he persuaded her, and she let him go away to
  find out about his home. But first she provided him for the
  journey with a brush, a comb, and two youth-giving apples.
  However old any one might be, let him eat one of these apples,
  he would grow young again in an instant.

  Well, Prince Ivan came to where Vertogor was. There was
  only just one mountain left! He took his brush and cast it
  down on the open plain. Immediately there rose out of the
  earth, goodness knows whence,[220] high, ever so high mountains,
  their peaks touching the sky. And the number of them was
  such that there were more than the eye could see![221] Vertogor
  rejoiced greatly and blithely recommenced his work.

  After a time Prince Ivan came to where Vertodub was, and
  found that there were only three trees remaining there. So he
  took the comb and flung it on the open plain. Immediately from
  somewhere or other there came a sound of trees,[222] and forth from
  the ground arose dense oak forests! each stem more huge than
  the other! Vertodub was delighted, thanked the Prince, and
  set to work uprooting the ancient oaks.

  By-and-by Prince Ivan reached the old women, and gave
  each of them an apple. They ate them, and straightway became
  young again. So they gave him a handkerchief; you only had
  to wave it, and behind you lay a whole lake! At last Prince
  Ivan arrived at home. Out came running his sister to meet him,
  caressed him fondly.

  "Sit thee down, my brother!" she said, "play a tune on the
  lute while I go and get dinner ready."

  The Prince sat down and strummed away on the lute [_gusli_].

  Then there crept a mouse out of a hole, and said to him in a
  human voice:

  "Save yourself, Prince. Run away quick! your sister has
  gone to sharpen her teeth."

  Prince Ivan fled from the room, jumped on his horse, and
  galloped away back. Meantime the mouse kept running over
  the strings of the lute. They twanged, and the sister never
  guessed that her brother was off. When she had sharpened
  her teeth she burst into the room. Lo and behold! not a soul
  was there, nothing but the mouse bolting into its hole! The
  witch waxed wroth, ground her teeth like anything, and set off
  in pursuit.

  Prince Ivan heard a loud noise and looked back. There was
  his sister chasing him. So he waved his handkerchief, and a
  deep lake lay behind him. While the witch was swimming across
  the water, Prince Ivan got a long way ahead. But on she came
  faster than ever; and now she was close at hand! Vertodub
  guessed that the Prince was trying to escape from his sister.
  So he began tearing up oaks and strewing them across the road.
  A regular mountain did he pile up! there was no passing by for
  the witch! So she set to work to clear the way. She gnawed,
  and gnawed, and at length contrived by hard work to bore her
  way through; but by this time Prince Ivan was far ahead.

  On she dashed in pursuit, chased and chased. Just a little
  more, and it would be impossible for him to escape! But Vertogor
  spied the witch, laid hold of the very highest of all the mountains,
  pitched it down all of a heap on the road, and flung
  another mountain right on top of it. While the witch was
  climbing and clambering, Prince Ivan rode and rode, and found
  himself a long way ahead. At last the witch got across the
  mountain, and once more set off in pursuit of her brother. By-and-by
  she caught sight of him, and exclaimed:

  "You sha'n't get away from me this time!" And now she is
  close, now she is just going to catch him!

  At that very moment Prince Ivan dashed up to the abode of
  the Sun's Sister and cried:

  "Sun, Sun! open the window!"

  The Sun's Sister opened the window, and the Prince bounded
  through it, horse and all.

  Then the witch began to ask that her brother might be given
  up to her for punishment. The Sun's Sister would not listen
  to her, nor would she give him up. Then the witch said:

  "Let Prince Ivan be weighed against me, to see which is the
  heavier. If I am, then I will eat him; but if he is, then let him
  kill me!"

  This was done. Prince Ivan was the first to get into one of
  the scales; then the witch began to get into the other. But no
  sooner had she set foot in it than up shot Prince Ivan in the air,
  and that with such force that he flew right up into the sky, and
  into the chamber of the Sun's Sister.

  But as for the Witch-Snake, she remained down below on
  earth.

      [The word _terem_ (plural _terema_) which occurs twice
      in this story (rendered the second time by "chamber")
      deserves a special notice. It is defined by Dahl, in
      its antique sense, as "a raised, lofty habitation, or
      part of one--a Boyar's castle--a Seigneur's house--the
      dwelling-place of a ruler within a fortress," &c. The
      "terem of the women," sometimes styled "of the girls,"
      used to comprise the part of a Seigneur's house, on
      the upper floor, set aside for the female members of
      his family. Dahl compares it with the Russian
      _tyurma_, a prison, and the German _Thurm_. But it
      seems really to be derived from the Greek +teremnon+,
      "anything closely shut fast or closely covered, a
      room, chamber," &c.

      That part of the story which refers to the Cannibal
      Princess is familiar to the Modern Greeks. In the
      Syriote tale of "The Strigla" (Hahn, No. 65) a
      princess devours her father and all his subjects. Her
      brother, who had escaped while she was still a babe,
      visits her and is kindly received. But while she is
      sharpening her teeth with a view towards eating him, a
      mouse gives him a warning which saves his life. As in
      the Russian story the mouse jumps about on the strings
      of a lute in order to deceive the witch, so in the
      Greek it plays a fiddle. But the Greek hero does not
      leave his sister's abode. After remaining concealed
      one night, he again accosts her. She attempts to eat
      him, but he kills her.

      In a variant from Epirus (Hahn, ii. p. 283-4) the
      cannibal princess is called a Chursusissa. Her brother
      climbs a tree, the stem of which she gnaws almost
      asunder. But before it falls, a Lamia comes to his aid
      and kills his sister.

      Afanasief (viii. p. 527) identifies the Sun's Sister
      with the Dawn. The following explanation of the skazka
      (with the exception of the words within brackets) is
      given by A. de Gubernatis ("Zool. Myth." i. 183).
      "Ivan is the Sun, the aurora [or dawn] is his [true]
      sister; at morning, near the abode of the aurora, that
      is, in the east, the shades of night [his witch, or
      false sister] go underground, and the Sun arises to
      the heavens; this is the mythical pair of scales. Thus
      in the Christian belief, St. Michael weighs human
      souls; those who weigh much sink down into hell, and
      those who are light arise to the heavenly paradise."]

As an illustration of this story, Afanasief (_P.V.S._ iii. 272) quotes
a Little-Russian Skazka in which a man, who is seeking "the Isle in
which there is no death," meets with various personages like those
with whom the Prince at first wished to stay on his journey, and at
last takes up his abode with the moon. Death comes in search of him,
after a hundred years or so have elapsed, and engages in a struggle
with the Moon, the result of which is that the man is caught up into
the sky, and there shines thenceforth "as a star near the moon."

The Sun's Sister is a mythical being who is often mentioned in the
popular poetry of the South-Slavonians. A Servian song represents a
beautiful maiden, with "arms of silver up to the elbows," sitting on a
silver throne which floats on water. A suitor comes to woo her. She
waxes wroth and cries,

    Whom wishes he to woo?
    The sister of the Sun,
    The cousin of the Moon,
    The adopted-sister of the Dawn.

Then she flings down three golden apples, which the
"marriage-proposers" attempt to catch, but "three lightnings flash
from the sky" and kill the suitor and his friends.

In another Servian song a girl cries to the Sun--

    O brilliant Sun! I am fairer than thou,
    Than thy brother, the bright Moon,
    Than thy sister, the moving star [Venus?].

In South-Slavonian poetry the sun often figures as a radiant youth.
But among the Northern Slavonians, as well as the Lithuanians, the sun
was regarded as a female being, the bride of the moon. "Thou askest me
of what race, of what family I am," says the fair maiden of a song
preserved in the Tambof Government--

    My mother is--the beauteous Sun,
    And my father--the bright Moon;
    My brothers are--the many Stars,
    And my sisters--the white Dawns.[223]

A far more detailed account might be given of the Witch and her near
relation the Baba Yaga, as well as of those masculine embodiments of
that spirit of evil which is personified in them, the Snake, Koshchei,
and other similar beings. But the stories which have been quoted will
suffice to give at least a general idea of their moral and physical
attributes. We will now turn from their forms, so constantly
introduced into the skazka-drama, to some of the supernatural figures
which are not so often brought upon the stage--to those mythical
beings of whom (numerous as may be the traditions about them) the
regular "story" does not so often speak, to such personifications of
abstract ideas as are less frequently employed to set its conventional
machinery in motion.
